---
title: 23 de Enero Campaign
permalink: /23_de_Enero_Campaign/
---

The **23 de Enero Campaign** refers to a small amount of direct action
in Caracas, [Venezuela](Venezuela "wikilink") in
[1981](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_South_America "wikilink") in
an effort to help improve a neighbourhood dominated by [state
housing](State_Housing "wikilink").

## Background

Following the privatisation of waste collection services at the
neighbourhood of 23 de Enero in Caracas, the site of the largest state
housing project in the country. The newly privatised service failed to
properly collect waste as rotting household waste began to pile up in
the street, threatening a public health crisis.

## Events

On 19 December 1981 Earles Gutierrez, his brother, and two friends
stopped a garbage truck driving through el 23 de Enero by stepping out
into the street in front of it. Gutierrez then forcefully, took control
of the vehicle and told the driver to go to the police station to report
the hijacking. Before the police arrived, they knocked on doors calling
on neighbors to join their action. When the police arrived, they found a
crowd of mostly women surrounding the garbage truck demanding that the
city clean up the neighborhood. Over the next few days, people began to
steal garbage trucks and refused to give them back until the
neighbourhoods were properly maintained.

After holding the trucks for a month, on 19 January 1982, community
members—youth, guerrilla veterans, and stay-at-home women—met with
high-level officials of various public service institutions in an
elementary school to discuss the problem. At the end of the meeting, the
officials had agreed to meet the residents’ demands and devote their
resources to cleaning up the neighborhood.

## Results

Within days, public workers began removing tons of trash from the
neighborhood, repaving roads, fixing elevators, rewiring power lines,
and installing phone service. The successful campaign led to a shift in
emphasis of public service in Venezuela politics.

## References

- <https://nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu/content/venezuelans-seize-service-vehicles-force-neighborhood-upgrade-caracas-1981>

[Category:Events](Category:Events "wikilink") [Category:Libertarian
Socialist Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Venezuela](Category:Venezuela "wikilink")
[Category:1981](Category:1981 "wikilink")
[Category:1980s](Category:1980s "wikilink") [Category:20th
Century](Category:20th_Century "wikilink") [Category:South
America](Category:South_America "wikilink")