---
title: A People's History of the United States
permalink: /A_People's_History_of_the_United_States/
---

**A People's History of the United States** is a book published in 1980
(with another edition in 2003) by historian [Howard
Zinn](Howard_Zinn "wikilink") which covers a history of the [United
States of America](United_States_of_America "wikilink") from the
perspective of the oppressed underclass. As opposed to the perspective
of economic, military and political elites that dominate most histories
of the US.

## Summary

### Chapter 1: Columbus, the Indians, and Human Progress

The encounter between Christopher Columbus and the indigenous
[Arawak](Arawak "wikilink") within what is the Bahamas was driven by the
newly developing nation-states in Europe's desire for money and power as
part of a growing colonial project that was taking hold in parts of Asia
and Africa. Despite the Arawak showering the Spanish and Italian
explorers and soldiers in gifts of gold, food, tools and shelter, a
genocide was soon to begin. Columbus, who desired fame, wealth and power
promised by the Spanish monarchy actively took credit for the actions of
his crew and organized a campaign of terrorism against the Arawak. Many
were taken in as a slaves and anyone who resisted were mutilated (often
publicly) with swords and killed.

Upon Columbus' second voyage, he began a campaign of sex trafficking of
Arawak women and children, anyone who tried to run away were hunted and
killed by packs of dogs owned by the colonizers. He ordered Arawaks to
find enough gold to impress his investors (which he had lied to) and cut
off the hands of those who failed to find enough. Arawaks formed various
armed cells in order to end colonialism and retake what had been stolen,
but they faced an army of men with guns and metal armour which would
hang them for at any sign of resistance. Capitalism was born in a
tsunami of blood, rape and genocide, seen by the Spanish as numbers on a
ledger.

The treatment of Arawak was so horrible that numerous Spanish priests
cried out for the soldiers to stop. Pointing out that the Arawak had
constructed a relatively advanced civilization, but the colonists
ignored this for monetary reasons. Cases of depression, suicide,
physical exhaustion, infant mortality and malnutrition exploded under
the Arawak, and around three million of them were killed in 12 years.
Despite clear evidence of this from primary sources, pro-Columbus
historians have repeatedly ignored or omitted these facts. All history
is nothing but ideology, designed to make murder and wars seem
acceptable and natural, rather than the product of particular political,
economic and social arrangements, and Howard Zinn aims to counter these
narratives by telling history through an anti-state, anti-capitalist and
anti-racist angle.

The Aztecs, Incas, Powhatan, Pequot all had their various villages,
towns and cities burned down as a way to extract their wealth for the
landowners and speculators and investors who funded the colonial venture
into the Americas. Early capitalism began it's process of primitive
accumulation by wiping out entire civilizations and ethnic groups. It
became increasingly difficult to enslave indigenous americans, as they
were able to escape, hide and kill their slave masters. So colonizers
resorted to a war of extermination, justifying their actions through
concepts like civilizing, god, property and human progress (as they
burned down homes, raped women and killed millions).How this is any
different to Stalin's or Churchill's murderous campaigns against ethnic
minorities or the nuclear bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki remains a
mystery.

Many upper-class and political elites will saying it was 'necessary' for
'progress' to do this. But they never asked how the poor, indigenous,
downtrodden, women, LGBT people or conscripted soldiers for their voice
in this 'march of progress'. These episodes of brutality, showing us the
worst of humanity, were only to accumulate a little more power in a
great game being played all over Europe. Not to mention how indigenous
americans had built civilizations comparable to ancient Egypt, Sumer,
China, Rome and Greece (in terms of size, population and technology)
despite less time and resources. Huge cities spread out across North
America, and civilizations had advanced cultures, philosophies and
political systems (notably the
[Haudenosaunee](Haudenosaunee_Confederacy "wikilink")). In contrasts to
Europe's authoritarian, patriarchal and capitalist nature, much of
indigenous North America was libertarian and decentralized, had gender
equality and communism.

### Chapter 2: Drawing the Color Line

## External Links

- [A People's History of the United
  States](http://historyisaweapon.com/zinnapeopleshistory.html) at
  historyisaweapon.com

[Category:Books](Category:Books "wikilink") [Category:Howard
Zinn](Category:Howard_Zinn "wikilink") [Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:USA](Category:USA "wikilink")