---
title: A Stake, Not a Mistake: On Not Seeing the Enemy
permalink: /A_Stake,_Not_a_Mistake:_On_Not_Seeing_the_Enemy/
---

**A Stake, Not a Mistake: On Not Seeing the Enemy**is a 2

## Transcript

I spent several years in the early sixties studying Underdevelopment. It
was frustrating, in that none of the theories I examined really seemed
to explain the phenomenon. That is, the Theories of Development that
were prevalent then (only in mainstream discourse, I later learned)
didn't really answer the question: Why are some countries poor? I would
look at US Aid programs, only to conclude that they didn't work, that
they didn't help countries develop, and often got in the way. My
response at that time was to argue, and to try to call to the attention
of US Aid administrators, that the programs weren't working, and were
not achieving the results they were supposed to. The programs were not
facilitating development and economic growth in the countries they were
supposed to be benefiting. Fortunately for me, with the explosion and
re-emergence of radical consciousness in late sixties, I was able to
overcome this naiveté.

Unfortunately though, for much of the American Left (especially for its
so-called progressive wing), this naiveté, this bad habit of not seeing
the enemy, this tendency to think that the US government's policies and
actions are just mistakes, this seemingly ineradicable belief that the
US government means well, is the most common outlook. It was certainly
the majoritarian belief among those who opposed the [Vietnam
War](Vietnam_War "wikilink"). I helped write a broad sheet once, which
we distributed at a big anti-war demonstration in Washington DC in
November 1969, and which was titled "Vietnam is a Stake not a Mistake".
In this document we spelled out the imperial reasons which explained why
the government was waging war, quite deliberately and rationally,
against Vietnam.

In subsequent decades there has been no end to the commentators who take
the 'this is a mistake' line. Throughout the low intensity (i.e.,
terrorist) wars against Nicaragua and El Salvador in the 1980s we heard
this complaint again and again. It is currently seen in the constant
stream of commentaries on the US assault on Colombia. It has been heard
repeatedly during the past two years in the demonstrations against the
World Bank and the World Trade Organization. Protesters complain that
the WTO's policies of structural adjustment are having the opposite
effect of what they're supposed to. That is, they are hindering, not
facilitating, development, and causing poverty, not alleviating it.

Two years ago, in 1999, throughout the 78 day bombing attack on
Yugoslavia, much of the outpouring of progressive commentary on the
event (that which didn't actually endorse the bombing that is) argued
that "this is a mistake".[^1] My favorite quote from that episode, was
from Robert Hayden, Director of the Center for Russian and East European
Studies at the University of Pittsburgh, being interviewed by [Amy
Goodman](Amy_Goodman "wikilink") on <em>Democracy Now</em>, April 19,
1999. He said: "But we have the Clinton administration that developed a
diplomacy that seems to have been intended to have produced this war,
and now the Clinton administration's actions seem determined to produce
a wider war." Amy Goodman: "Why would the Clinton Administration want to
produce a war?" Hayden: "Boy, you know what? You've got me there. And as
I say, you have to go back to the simple principles of incompetence.
Never assume competence on the part of these guys." This was surely the
bottom of the pit for the 'this is a mistake' crowd. I could cite quotes
like this by the dozen, but instead let me turn to our current "war".

So what has been the response of the 'progressive community' to the
bombing of Afghanistan? As usual, they just don't get it. They just
can't seem to grasp the simple fact that the government does this stuff
on purpose. Endlessly, progressives talk as if the government is just
making a mistake, does not see the real consequences of its actions, or
is acting irrationally, and they hope to correct the government's course
by pointing out the errors of its ways. Progressives assume that their
goals -- peace, justice, well-being -- are also the government's goals.
So when they look at what the government is doing, they get alarmed and
puzzled, because it is obvious that the government's actions are not
achieving these goals. So they cry out: "Hey, this policy doesn't lead
to peace!" or "Hey, this policy doesn't achieve justice (or democracy,
or development)!" By pointing this out, they hope to educate the
government, to help it to see its mistakes, to convince it that its
policies are not having the desired results.\[2\]

How can they not see that the US government acts deliberately, and that
it knows what it is doing? How can they not see that the government's
goals are not peace and justice, but empire and profit. It
<em>wants</em> these wars, this repression. These policies are not
mistakes; they are not irrational; they are not based on a failure of
moral insight (since morality is not even a factor in their
considerations); they are not aberrations; they are not based on a
failure to analyze the situation correctly; they are not based on
ignorance. This repression, these bombings, wars, massacres,
assassinations, and covert actions are the coldly calculated, rational,
consistent, intelligent, and informed actions of a ruling class
determined at all costs to keep its power and wealth and preserve its
way of life (capitalism). It has demonstrated great historical presence,
persistence, and continuity in pursuing this objective. This ruling
class <em>knows</em> that it is committing atrocities, <em>knows</em>
that it is destroying democracy, hope, welfare, peace, and justice,
<em>knows</em> that it is murdering, massacring, slaughtering,
poisoning, torturing, lying, stealing, and <em>it doesn't care</em>. Yet
most progressives seem to believe that if only they point out often
enough and loud enough that the ruling class is murdering people, that
it will wake up, take notice, apologize, and stop doing it.

Here is a typical expression of this naiveté (written by an author,
Brian Willson, who was in the process of introducing a list of US
interventions abroad!):

"Many of us are continually disturbed and grief stricken because it
seems that our U.S. government does not yet understand: (a) the
historical social, cultural, and economic issues that underlay most of
the political and ecological problems of the world; (b) the need to
comply with, as legally agreed to, rather than continually defy,
international law and international institutions established for
addressing conflict; and (c) that military solutions, including
production, sale, and use of the latest in technological weapons, are
simply ill-equipped and wrong-headed for solving fundamental social and
economic problems." \[3\]

He is wrong on all three counts. (a) The US government has an intimate,
detailed knowledge of the social, cultural, and economic characteristics
of every country it intervenes in. It is especially familiar with the
ethnic, linguistic, political, and religious divisions within the
country. It is not interested in how these issues "underlay most of the
political and ecological problems of the world", since it is not
interested in those problems, certainly not in solving them, since it is
the main creator of those problems. Rather, it uses its expert knowledge
to manipulate events within the country in order to advance its own
goals, profit and empire. (b) The US government understands perfectly
that it expressly needs <em><em>not</em></em> to comply with
international law in order to maintain its ability to act unilaterally,
unfettered by any constraints, to advance its imperial aims. The claim
that the US defies international law because of a misunderstanding is
absurd. (c) Who says that the US government is trying to solve
"fundamental social and economic problems"? These are not its aims at
all. The objectives that it does pursue, consciously and relentlessly,
namely profit and empire, are in fact the <em>causes</em> of these very
"social and economic problems". Furthermore, for its true aims, military
solutions, far from being "ill-equipped and wrong-headed", work
exceptionally well. Military might sustains the empire. Arming every
little client regime of the international ruling class with 'the latest
in technological weapons" is necessary, and quite effective, in
maintaining the repressive apparatus needed to defend empire, in
addition to raking in lots of profit for the arms manufacturers. But
evidently Mr. Willson "does not yet understand" any of these things.

Let's take another example. Russell Mokhiber and Robert Weissman,
otherwise very sensible writers, complain that "bombing a desperately
poor country under the yoke of a repressive regime is a wrongheaded
response \[to the "unspeakable acts of violence" committed on Sept.
11\]. "The U.S. bombing of Afghanistan should cease immediately," they
say. They discuss three reasons: "1. The policy of bombing increases the
risk of further terrorism against the United States. 2. The bombing is
intensifying a humanitarian nightmare in Afghanistan. 3. There are
better ways to seek justice." All three statements are true of course,
but irrelevant, because seeking justice, avoiding humanitarian
nightmares, and reducing the risk of terrorism do not enter into the
calculations of US policy makers. Quite the contrary, US policy makers
<em>create</em> injustice, humanitarian nightmares, and terrorism,
throughout the world, in pursuit of the imperial objective of making
profit, and this has been thoroughly documented in thousands of
scholarly studies. So for Mokhiber and Weissman to talk in this way, and
phrase the problem in this way, exposes their failure to really
comprehend the enemy we face, which in turn prevents them from looking
for effective strategies to defeat that enemy, like so many other
opponents of the "war". Hence all the moralizing, the bulk of which is
definitely directed at the rulers, not at the ruled. That is, it is not
an attempt to win over the ruled, but an attempt to win over the rulers.
\[4\]

It's what I call the "we should" crowd -- all those people who hope to
have a voice in the formation of policy, people whose stances are
basically that of consultants to the ruling class. "We" should do this,
"we" shouldn't do that, as if they had anything at all to say about what
our rulers do. This is the normal stance among the bootlicking
intelligentsia of course. But what is it doing among progressives and
radicals? Even if their stance is seen to be not exactly that of
consultants, but that of citizens making demands upon their government,
what makes them think that the government ever listens? I think this
attitude -- the "we should" attitude -- is rooted in part at least in
the fact that most progressives still believe in nations and
governments. They believe that this is "our" country, and that this is
"our" government, or at least should be. So Kevin Danaher says that "we
should get control of the government." They identify themselves as
Americans, or Germans, or Mexicans, or Swedes. So they are constantly
advising and making demands that 'their' government should do this and
that. If they would reject nationalism altogether, and states and
governments, they could begin to see another way.

A variation of the 'this is a mistake' theme has appeared in
commentaries on the present "war", on Afghanistan. Progressives argue
that the US is "falling into a trap". They argue that Osama bin Laden
had hoped to provoke the US into doing just what it is doing, attacking
Afghanistan. In their view, the US government is being stupid, acting
blindly, responding irrationally, and showing incompetence. That is, it
is "making a mistake". It never seems to occur to these analysts that
the government may actually be awake, even alert, or that it jumped at
the opportunity offered it by the attacks of September Eleven to do what
it had wanted to do anyway -- seize Afghanistan, build a big new base in
Uzbekistan, declare unending war on the enemies of Empire everywhere,
and initiate draconian repression against internal dissent in order to
achieve "domestic tranquility".

I saw yet another variation on the theme just recently. John Tirman
writes about "Unintended Consequences".\[5\] He thinks that "No matter
how cautious generals and political leaders are ... unseen and
unintended \[results\] occur, at times as a bitter riptide which
overwhelms the original rationales for engaging in armed combat. This
unpredictable cycle of action and reaction has thwarted U.S. policy in
southwest Asia for 50 years." It's the usual mistake: Tirman imputes
policies to the US government which it does not have. US policy has not
been thwarted, it has been highly successful. The US has succeeded in
keeping control of Middle Eastern oil for the past half century. This is
what it wanted to do, and this is what it did. Tirman however reviews
the history of US intervention in the Middle East, beginning with the
overthrow of Mossedegh in Iran in 1953, and sees it as one long blunder,
nothing but bumbling incompetence, complicated further by 'unintended
consequences' which thwart the goals of American foreign policy. He
seems to think that the US was (or "should be") trying to reduce US
dependence on Middle Eastern oil, fighting Islamic fundamentalism,
reducing human suffering, assisting in economic development, promoting
democracy, and so on -- anything and everything except what it is
actually doing, keeping control of Middle Eastern oil, and using any
means necessary to do so. Tirman is aware of course that this (oil) is
the true aim of US policy, because he quotes directly from US officials
who state this objective explicitly, but somehow this doesn't sink in.
Instead, he finally asks in exasperation: "What will be next in this
series of haunting mistakes?"

Ariel Dorfman, author of a creative critique of US imperialism, in the
form of <em>How to Read Donald Duck: Imperialist Ideology in the Disney
Comic</em>, was being interviewed on <em>Democracy Now</em> by Amy
Goodman, on October 25, 2001, about the assassination of Digna Ochoa,
the leading civil rights lawyer in Mexico. When asked by Goodman to put
the murder in the larger context of what was happening in the world,
like in Afghanistan, Dorfman replied: "Because the US is in Afghanistan
and it needs all its allies behind it, they are going to turn a blind
eye to all the abuses of authority that are happening." Pardon me? A
blind eye? Isn't the US government in the business, with both eyes open,
of murdering labor leaders, leftists, progressives, and civil rights
activists all over the world? Dorfman went on to say that now would be
"a good moment that President Bush could call his friend Vicente Fox and
say: 'I want the murderers of Digna Ochoa put on trial'." Excuse me! Is
he kidding? It's quite probable that Bush did call Fox, but with a
rather different message, namely, to tell him that while the world's
attention was focused on Afghanistan, now would be a good time to kill
Digna Ochoa y Placido.

An Afghani man from Kabul escaped into Pakistan carrying a packet of
letters addressed to the world's leaders, "handwritten messages from his
panic-stricken community."

"The world must know what is happening in Afghanistan," said Mohammed
Sardar, 46, his voice ragged with anxiety and anger. "The terrorists and
the leaders are still free, but the people are dying and there is no one
to listen to us. I must get to President Bush and the others and tell
them they are making a terrible mistake." \[6\]

The widespread belief that the US government has good intentions, a
belief held onto tenaciously in spite of decades of overwhelming
empirical evidence refuting it, has got to be one of the greatest
phenomena of mass delusion in history. It would take a twenty-first
century Freud to unravel this one. Here is a government that has already
bombed two other countries to smithereens just in the past ten years,
first Iraq and then Yugoslavia (not to mention endless interventions
abroad since its inception \[7\]). Now it is bombing Afghanistan to
smithereens -- hospitals, fuel supplies, food depots, electrical
systems, water systems, radio stations, telephone exchanges, remote
villages, mosques, old folks homes, UN offices, Red Cross warehouses,
clinics, schools, neighborhoods, roads, dams, airports -- and a victim
of the assault escapes to plead for help from the very people who are
attacking him. To have created such an illusion as this is surely one of
the greatest feats of propaganda ever seen.\[8\]

So although it is important to try to shatter this illusion, it is
ultimately not enough, and of very limited effectiveness, simply to list
all the atrocities committed by our rulers, carefully expose all their
double standards, accuse them of being the real terrorists, morally
condemn what they are doing, or call for peace. All these arguments are
useful of course in the battle for the hearts and minds of average
people, <em>if average people ever heard them</em>, which they do not,
for the most part. And if they do hear them, it's like they (most of
them) are tuning in to madness, they're so brainwashed. It takes a lot
more than mere arguments to break through the mindset of a thoroughly
indoctrinated people.

Of all the dozens of comments that I read on the government's response
to the attacks of September Eleven, precious few raised the key
question: How do we stop them (the government, from attacking
Afghanistan)? For the most part, progressive commentators don't even
raise questions of strategy.\[9\] They are too busy analyzing ruling
class ideology, in order to highlight its hypocrisies. Proving that the
ruling class is hypocritical doesn't get us very far. It's useful of
course. Doing this work is an important task. Noam Chomsky, for example,
devotes himself almost exclusively to this task, and we should be
thankful that we have his research. He usually does mention also,
somewhere in almost every speech, article, or interview, that 'it
doesn't have to be this way', that this situation we are in is not
inevitable, and that we can change it. But when asked "How?", he
replies, "Organize, agitate, educate." Well, sure. But the Christian
Coalition organizes, agitates, and educates. So did the Nazis and the
Klu Klux Klan. The Taliban organizes, agitates, and educates. So does
the ruling class, and it does so in a massive and highly successful way,
which results in overwhelming hegemony for its point of view.

In spite of more than three decades of blistering exposés of US foreign
policy, and in spite of the fact that he is an anarchist, and is thus
supposedly against all government, at least in the long run, Chomsky
still regularly uses the 'universal we'. Much of the time Chomsky says
"The US government does this, or does that," but some of the time he
says "We do this, or we do that," thus including himself, and us, as
agents in the formation and execution of US foreign policy. This is an
instance of what I call the 'universal we'. It presumes a democracy that
does not exist. The average American has no say whatsoever in the
formation and execution of US foreign policy. Nor do we even have any
influence in picking the people who are making it, since we have no say
over who gets to run for office or what they do after they are elected.
So to say something like "<em><em>we</em></em> shouldn't be bombing
Afghanistan", as so many progressives do, is highly misleading, and
expresses a misperception and misdiagnosis of the situation we are in.

In the question period following Chomsky's major address on "The New War
Against Terror" (delivered at MIT on October 18) \[10\], Chomsky was
challenged by a man in the audience who accused Chomsky of blaming
America for the tragedy of September 11. Chomsky correctly said that the
term America is an abstraction and cannot do anything. But then he said
that he blamed himself, and his questioner, and others present, for this
event (implying that 'we' are responsible for what 'our' government
does). This is a half-truth at best. The blame for September Eleven
rests squarely on those who did it. Next, to the extent that a
connection can be proved between their actions and US foreign policy,
the US government is to blame, and the ruling class that controls the
government. Average Americans are to blame for what the US government
does only in the sense that they have not managed to change or block its
policies, either because they haven't tried or because they have tried
but have failed.

Of course, the category of Average American is an abstraction as well.
Many average Americans vigorously support US foreign policy. Others
oppose it, but have failed to change it. Those of us who want a real
democracy, and want to put an end to Empire, have so far failed to do
so, and only in this sense are we in anyway responsible for September
Eleven. But even this failure must be judged in light of the relative
strengths that the parties bring to the fight. We cannot fault ourselves
for being defeated by an opponent with overwhelmingly superior forces,
as long as we fought as bravely and as hard as we could. Our task is to
find ways to enhance our strengths and weaken theirs. To fail to make a
distinction between the ruling class and the rest of us hinders this
task, causes us to presume a democracy that does not exist, to
misunderstand exactly what we are up against, and to misidentify the
enemy. It thus prevents us from devising a successful strategy for
defeating this enemy.

In this same speech, which was over an hour long, Chomsky didn't once
mention oil. When questioned about this during the discussion that
followed, he said that of course oil was always there in the background,
for anything happening in the Middle East, but he didn't see oil as an
immediate factor in the current crisis. He is surely wrong about this.
There is plenty of evidence that securing Afghanistan, in order to get a
pipeline through to the Arabian Sea, is a key consideration for US
policy makers. They are already in the process of building a huge new
military base in Uzbekistan (just as they are building one in Kosovo),
and have concluded a long-term agreement with the Uzbekistan government
to do so, similar to ones they have made in Saudi Arabia, Spain, Turkey,
Philippines, and elsewhere. These bases will be used to secure the
Central Asian oil and gas reserves for the West. They will also be
thrown into service to accomplish another aim, beyond oil, namely, to
facilitate the recolonization of the Balkans and Russia, and to ensure
that they do not return to Communism or try to escape the New World
Order. This is the larger geopolitical objective that drives the Empire
builders.

Howard Zinn seems to think it is all a struggle between an 'old way of
thinking', based on war and violence, and a 'new way of thinking' based
on peace and nonviolence. Hardly a hint here of Empire, and no hint at
all of Profit and Capital. As moving and inspiring as his remarks were
on the September Eleven crisis,\[11\] they just didn't cut it, as
concerns getting ourselves out of the horrible situation we are in. Zinn
of course it very aware (but most so-called progressives aren't) of
ruling classes, empire, capital, and profit, and has labored long and
hard to write their histories and people's opposition to them. But
somehow this doesn't get reflected in his thinking about what to do
about it all now. When it comes to strategy, moral condemnation is where
he rested his case, in his response to these events at least.

In a speech on October 21, in Burlington, Vermont, Zinn said that we
must change from being a military superpower to being a moral
superpower.\[12\] During the speech he had vividly described the many
foreign invasions undertaken by the US government and their devastating
consequences, claimed that America was not a peaceful nation, reminded
us that governments lie, pointed out that oil is the key to American
foreign policy in the Middle East, and described the vast deployment of
military bases and armament all over the world in order to extend
American power. He may even have mentioned profit once or twice. But he
never once mentioned 'capitalism' (let alone "colonialism",
"imperialism", or "ruling class"), nor did he in any way indicate an
awareness that the projection of American power all over the world is
for a reason, that it is being used in defense of a particular social
order, and that this social order benefits, and is therefore being
defended by, a particular class.

It's almost as if Zinn thinks that the US government could simply pack
up and go home, if it only wanted to -- dismantle its bases, pull its
armies, fleets, and planes out, and leave the world alone. If the US
ruling class did that, it, and the system upon which it feeds,
capitalism, would collapse. So we know that it is not going to dismantle
its forward bases and leave the world alone, no matter how hard we try
to shame it with our moralizing. Zinn did not seem to grasp this fact or
to recognize that there is an enemy that has to be defeated, before the
\$350 billion could be taken away from the Pentagon and used to help
people (another one of his recommendations). And when it came time to
talk about what to do about it all, he recommended organizing
demonstrations and writing letters to our congressional representatives!

The 'peace now' protesters strike a similar stance. Of course, it was
heartening to see an anti-war movement blossom almost immediately. But
it was also disheartening. It meant that radicals were letting the
war-mongers set the agenda. Instead of continuing the fight against
neoliberalism and its institutions, and against capitalism,
oppositionists suddenly dropped all this to launch an anti-war campaign.
The candlelight vigils, especially, seemed to me a pathetic response to
a war-mongering, repressive government. This happens again and again.
The government launches a war of aggression, and the peaceniks take to
the streets, with their candles, crying "peace now" and "no more war".
Do they ever win? Have they ever stopped even one war? Do they ever even
think about how they could win? Doesn't the inefficacy of their response
prove that they are not really serious about peace? Do they ever think
about ways of actually stopping the murderers rather than just pleading
with them not to kill? They keep saying that peace cannot be achieved by
going to war. Who says the US government wants peace!? They quote A.J.
Muste as saying that war is not the way to peace; peace is the way. Is
this relevant? Does it make sense to quote such thoughts to a government
that has always engaged, from its inception two hundred years ago, in
systematic mass murder?

Similarly with the bulk of the other progressive commentators. They are
just trying to change the government's policy, not stop them and deprive
them of power. Here is a typical sentence. Rahul Mahajan and Robert
Jensen write: "The next step is for us to build a movement that can
change our government's barbaric and self-destructive policy."\[13\] You
see, from the government's point of view, its policy is not barbaric or
self-destructive. It is intelligent, self-serving, and self-preserving.
Mahajan and Jensen actually pretty much admit this in their piece, by
reasoning that "This war is about the extension of U.S. power. It has
little to do with bringing the terrorists to justice, or with
vengeance." (Such a view is rather rare among progressives actually.)
They argue that there are three other motives for the war, from the
government's point of view: the desire to defend "imperial credibility",
to control "oil and natural gas of Central Asia," and "to push a
right-wing domestic agenda." Nevertheless, in spite of these insights,
they still stop short of realizing that they therefore have to fight,
stop, and neutralize the government, rather than just change its policy.
Given who the government is, who it serves (capital, the rich), and what
its interests and priorities are, it can't change its policies into
those favored by progressives, not and survive as an imperial power that
is.

It is not only as regards foreign policy that the 'this is a mistake'
line makes an appearance. Progressive commentators suffer from this
affliction with regards to domestic policy too. If the government passes
a tax cut to benefit the richest corporations and superrich individuals,
but calls it a package to stimulate the economy, progressives complain
loudly that the bill doesn't accomplish what it's supposed to, that it
doesn't stimulate the economy. Why can't they simply admit that the
government (the Administration <em>and</em> Congress) <em>intended</em>
and <em>wanted</em> to give more money to the rich ruling class, because
it is from, and represents the interests of, this class, and that it
called its bill an economic stimulus package only in order to sell it
and to deceive the American public?

The 'this is a mistake' crowd was out in full force in the discussion
surrounding the new anti-terrorist legislation which the Bush
Administration submitted to Congress immediately after the September
Eleven attacks. Attorney General Ashcroft said that the government had
taken pains not to abridge any of our precious civil rights in its
efforts to deal with the terrorist threat, and had tried to strike a
balance between security and liberty. So progressives took him at his
word and started pointing out that this wasn't true, that the bill did
step on our civil rights and did not strike a good balance between
security and liberty. Then they started coming up with a bunch of
excuses. They said the bill was 'rammed through Congress'. Well, why did
Congress permit this? They said the leaders of Congress bypassed the
usual rules and procedures, and dealt with the bill basically in secret?
Well, if Congress is committed to democracy, why can't it practice
democracy in its own halls? And why weren't there attempts to stop this
secret handling of the bill? They said that Congress didn't even have a
chance to read the bill. Well, why didn't it take the time to do so, and
delay the vote until it had?

This bill, the so-called USA Patriot Act of 2001, which shreds the
fourth amendment (protection against unwarranted search and seizure),
gives the government the right to spy on everyone, bypasses criminal
law, the courts, and due process in numerous instances, plus dozens more
horrors, was passed in the Senate by a vote of 98-1. So this flaming
liberal senator, Edward Kennedy, didn't realize what he was voting for?
Please. He knew. They knew. <em>And they wanted it</em>. The
Administration and Congress (minus 66 representatives in the House and 1
senator in the Senate) were united in their desire to further strengthen
the Police State that they have been building for some time. They are
not committed to democracy. They are committed to preserving capitalism,
which is their lifeblood. You think they haven't noticed the growing
protest movement that has erupted onto the world scene in the last two
years? You think they're not worried about that movement and determined
to stop it?

A friendly, tolerant, enlightened, pseudo-democratic capitalism is no
longer historically feasible (not that it was ever really much of any of
these things). We are living in the age of Zero Tolerance Capitalism,
with its Global War Machine, its Mammoth Intelligence Agencies, its
Secret Police, its Echelons and Carnivores, its Covert Operations, its
humungous Police Departments, its ubiquitous Security Guards, its Death
Squads, its National Security States, its Swat Teams and Special Forces,
its State Terrorism and Torture, its High-Tech Surveillance, its
Non-Lethal Weapons, its Low-Intensity Warfare, its Para-Militaries, its
Mercenaries, its Smart Bombs, its Prison-Industrial Complex, its
Chemical, Biological, and Nuclear weapons, and its World Bank and World
Trade Organization. Now, with the US Congress's aptly-named USA Patriot
Act of 2001, it has finally managed to shred the Bill of Rights. The US
ruling class never wanted the Bill of Rights to begin with; it was
forced on them.

So the Hitlers and Mussolinis of the world have won after all (almost).
All the while we were thinking that we had rid the world of fascism in
the Second World War, fascism was sneaking in the back door, and turning
America into a World Fascist Empire. Zero Tolerance fascist-like
regimes, supported and often installed by the United States, have long
existed throughout most of the world -- Mobuto in Zaire, Pinochet in
Chile, Somoza in Nicaragua, Armas in Guatemala, Franco in Spain,
Papadopoulos in Greece, Pahlavi in Iran, Marcos in the Philippines,
Sharon in Israel. Now the repressive, Zero Tolerance, National Security
State, has come home to America. They will probably start torturing and
killing in Europe and America the way they have been doing everywhere
else. (They are already torturing and killing, but they have managed so
far to keep it under wraps). Will they get away with it?

How many centuries of mass murder does it take to prove that ruling
classes dependent on and devoted to a system based on profit are
impervious to moral appeal, and are beyond redemption, certainly as long
as they have any power left to continue killing? Moral appeals are
useless against such people. Were moral appeals enough to defeat the
Nazis, and German and Italian Fascism? Didn't we have to fight them?
Similarly with our current war-mongers and empire builders, with
American Fascism, if you will. They must be faced with real opposition,
although not necessarily military opposition, which actually is not even
an option for us, given that it is so impossible for poor people to
acquire the weapons. It is thus ineffective to even think about fighting
a war in traditional terms, as this is not a possible, nor a winning,
strategy. All the same, the rulers' power to exploit, oppress, murder,
and wage war must be destroyed. We need to come up with a strategy for
doing this. It certainly cannot be done merely by taking to the streets,
holding candlelight vigils, or exposing their hypocrisy. The war must be
fought, to be sure, but fought in new ways, ways that are within our
means and that can lead to victory.

<strong><em>The urgent need to reassemble ourselves to take power away
from criminals.</em></strong>

I believe that there is a way to defeat this global ruling class, but it
means that we have to reassemble ourselves socially on a massive scale.
We have to gather ourselves together in directly democratic,
face-to-face deliberative assemblies at work, at home, and in our
neighborhoods. This would give us a foundation from which to begin
draining power and wealth away from the ruling class. Without these
social forms, we are necessarily restricted to all the various forms of
reformism, restricted to trying to work through NGOs or state and
national governments, to changing ruling class behavior, to making moral
appeals, or to seeking to get or reverse certain legislation. But by
reorganizing ourselves into a multitude of small, decentralized,
directly democratic, face-to-face, local assemblies, coalesced together
into inter-regional associations by means of voluntary treaties, we can
begin to take back control of our lives and communities, and get the
ruling class off our backs.

I have sketched out this strategy in my book <em>Getting Free</em>
\[14\], and have discussed there in some detail its various
implications. As long as the world is organized on the basis of
governments and corporations, nations and profit, there will never be
peace, justice, freedom, or democracy. Our task is nothing less than to
get rid of the social order we live in, and to create another one to
take its place. If we fail to do this now, we will shortly find
ourselves living in a full-fledged world fascist empire a thousand times
more powerful and sophisticated than the Nazis ever could have been, and
from which it will be next to impossible to escape.

<strong>Further Reading on Selected Topics</strong>

<em>On US Interventions Abroad</em>

William Blum, <em>Killing Hope: U.S. Military and CIA Interventions
since World War II</em> (Common Courage, 1995, 457 pages).

<em>On Terrorism</em>

Edward S. Herman, <em>The Real Terror Network: Terrorism in Fact and
Propaganda</em> (South End Press, 1982, 252 pages).

<em>On Fascism</em>

David McGowan, <em>Understanding the F-Word: American Fascism and the
Politics of Illusion</em> (iUniverse, 2001, 276 pages).

<em>Patriot Act</em>

Analyses of the USA Patriot Act of 2001 can be found on the web sites of
the American Civil Liberties Union (www.aclu.org) and the Electronic
Frontier Foundation (www.eff.org).

<em>On fundamentalism</em>

Fotis Terzakis, "Irrationalism, Fundamentalism, and Religious Revival:
The Colors of the Chess-Board," <em>Democracy and Nature</em>, Vol 4,
Nos. 2/3 (Issue 11/12, no date, but c.1998), also available on the
Internet at:
<em>(</em>www.democracynature.org/dn/vol4/terzakis_irrationalism.htm).

Colin Ward, "Fundamentalism", <em>The Raven</em>, No. 27 (Freedom Press)
on the Net at (www.ecn.org/freedom/ Raven/fund.html).

Frederick Clarkson, <em>Eternal Hostility: The Struggle between
Theocracy and Democracy</em> (Common Courage, 1996, 277 pages).

<em>On Empire</em>

Michael Parenti, <em>Against Empire</em> (City Lights, 1995, 216 pages).

Peter Gowan, <em>The Global Gamble: Washington's Faustian Bid for World
Dominance</em> (Verso, 1999, 230 pages).

Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, <em>Empire</em> (Harvard University
Press, 2001, 478 pages).

Joseph Gerson and Bruce Birchard, editors, <em>The Sun Never Sets:
Confronting the Network of Foreign U.S. Military Bases</em> (South End
Press, 1991, 389 pages).

<em>On Afghanistan</em>

A few of the better essays on the attack on Afghanistan, which for the
most part don't make the mistake of thinking that the US government
doesn't know what it's doing, are (all dates are from 2001): Alexander
Cockburn and Jeffrey St Clair, "Bush's Wars", <em>Counterpunch</em>,
Sept 21 (plus many more fine essays on this crisis by these authors
posted on <em>Counterpunch</em> web site: www.counterpunch.org); John
Pilger, "Hidden Agenda Behind War on Terror," <em>Mirror</em> /uk,
October 29 (plus many other excellent essays, at
http://pilger.carlton.com/print); Michel Chossudovsky, "Osamagate,"
(posted October 9, at www.globalresearch.ca/articles/
CHO110A.print.html); Francis A. Boyle, "No War Against Afghanistan!,"
Oct 18 (msanews.nynet.net/Scholars/Boyle/nolwar.html); Edward Said, "The
Clash of Ignorance," the <em>Nation</em>, October 22; Sitaram Yechury,
"America, Oil, and Afghanistan," <em>The Hindu</em>, October 13; Edward
S. Herman, "Antiterrorism as a Cover for Terrorism," (www.zmag.org/
hermancover.htm); Arundhati Roy, "War Is Peace," <em>Outlook</em>, Oct.
18 (later published in the <em>Guardian</em>, Oct 23); Sunera Thobani,
"War Frenzy," (www.neravt.com/left/thobani.html); Michael Parenti,
"Terrorism Meets Reactionism," (www.michaelparenti.org/Terrorism.html);
George Monbiot, "America's Pipe Dream," <em>Guardian</em> /uk, Oct 23);
Jared Israel, Rick Rozoff & Nico Varkevisser, "Why Washington Wants
Afghanistan," (posted Sept 18, on www.emperors-
clothes.com/analysis/afghan.htm); Sean Healy, "The Empire wants war, not
justice," (no date, www.zmag.org/healywar.htm); Noam Chomsky, "The New
War Against Terror," Oct 18 (www.zmag.org/GlobalWatch/chomskymit.htm);
Patrick Martin, "US-Uzbekistan pact sheds light on Washington's war aims
in Central Asia," <em>World Socialist Web Site</em>
(www.wsws.org/articles/2001/oct2001/uzbe-o18_pm.shtml); Nick Beams,
"Behind the 'anti-terrorism' mask: imperialist powers prepare new forms
of colonialism," <em>World Socialist Web Site</em>, Oct 18
(www.wsws.org/articles/2001/oct2001/imp-o18_pm.shtml); Vijay Prashad,
"War against the Planet," (no date, www.zmag.org/prashcalam.htm); Stan
Goff, "The So-Called Evidence is a Farce," October 10, <em>Narco</em>
<em>News</em> (www.narconews.com/ goff1.html); Al Giordano,
"Washington's 'Terrorist' List: Road through Afghanistan leads to
Colombia," Oct 1, <em>Narco</em> <em>NewsA-Info News
ServiceAl-Ahram</em>, 18-24 October
(www.ahram.org/eg/weekly/2001/556/op9); Renfrey Clarke, "War on
terrorism or war on the Third World?, <em>Green Left</em>, Oct 17
(www.greenleft.org.au/current/ 467p16.htm); Robin Blackburn, "Road to
Armageddon," <em>Counterpunch</em>, Oct 3. All web site addresses valid
as of October, 2001. (www.narconews.com/war2.html); Chicago Area
Anarchists, "Anarchists against the expansion of capitalism and the
war," (www.infoshop.org/inews/stories.php?story=01/10/25/7453849); Jared
Israel, "Washington Plots, Moscow Crawls, Kabul Burns,"
(www.emperors-clothes.com/misc/burns); Hani Shukrallah, "Capital Strikes
Back," (www.neravt.com/left).

The following web sites have extensive links covering September Eleven,
Afghanistan, and the so-called war on terrorism: <em>Common Dreams News
Center</em> (www.commondreams.org), <em>Znet</em>
(www.zmag.org/znet.htm), <em>Jay's Leftist and Progressive Internet
Directory, Alternet</em> (www.alternet.org), <em>Counterpunch</em>
(www.counterpunch.org), <em>Mid-Atlantic Info Shop</em>
(www.infoshop.org/news); <em>Global Circle Net News</em>
(www.globalcircle.net).

<strong>Footnotes</strong>

\[1\] An excellent book on Yugoslavia which does not suffer from this
naiveté, the best book so far, that I am aware of, on the bombing, is
Michael Parenti, <em>To Kill a Nation: The Attack on Yugoslavia</em>
(Verso, 2000, 246 pages).

\[2\] Web sites such as <em>Common Dreams</em> (www.commondreams.org),
<em>Znet</em> (www.zmag.org/znet), and <em>Alternet</em>
(www.alternet.org) are loaded with "this is a mistake" pieces, as are
magazines like the <em>Nation</em>, the <em>Progressive</em>, <em>In
These Times,</em> and the <em>Progressive Populist.</em>

\[3\] S. Brian Willson, "Who are the Real Terrorists? Why some veterans
oppose counter- "terrorist" exercises", March 1999, Veterans for Peace,
at: (www.mbay.net/~jenvic/vfp/mar22.htm).

\[4\] Russell Mokhiber and Robert Weissman, "Three Arguments Against the
War," posted on the <em>Common Dreams News Center</em> web site for
October 18, 2001 (www.commondreams.org).

\[5\] John Tirman, "Unintended Consequences", posted on
<em>Alternet</em>, Oct 24, 2001 (at www.alternet.org).

\[6\] Reported by Pamela Constable, <em>Washington Post</em>, Oct 24,
2001, "Plaintive Afghan's Plea from Community: Stop the Bombing".

\[7\] The best brief introduction to this history that I have seen so
far is "A Concise History of United States Global Interventions, 1945 to
Present," by William Blum, in his <em>Rogue State: A Guide to the
World's Only Superpower</em> (Common Courage, 2000, 308 pages), pp.
125-162. References to longer lists of interventions covering the whole
history of the U.S. government can be found in Zoltan Grossman's "One
Hundred Years of Intervention," on <em>Jay's Leftist and Progressive
Internet Resource Directory</em> (www.neravt.com/left/invade.htm). See
also, Steve Kangas, "A Timeline of CIA Atrocities," available on the
<em>Liberalism Resurgent</em> web site at
(http://home.att.net/~Resurgence/CIAtimeline.html).

\[8\] The only other essay from this deluge of writing about the
so-called war on terrorism that I have seen which challenges the 'this
is a mistake' line (although many people have pointed out that the US
government is itself a terrorist state), is a really excellent piece by
Edward Herman and David Peterson, "Who Terrorizes Whom?", posted on
<em>Zmag</em> web site, dated October 18, 2001
(www.zmag.org/whoterrorizes.htm). In discussing Richard Falk's claim
that the attack on Afghanistan is "the first truly just war since World
War II", for example, they write: "it never occurs to Falk that the
right-wing Republican regime of Bush and Cheney, so close to the oil
industry and military-industrial complex, might have an agenda
incompatible with a just war." They call this Left Accommodationism,
cite several examples, and give a good analysis of the phenomenon.

\[9\] A rare exception is Naomi Klein, who frequently focuses on
questions of strategy. See for example, "Signs of the Times," the
<em>Nation</em>, October 22, 2001.

\[10\] The transcript of this speech has been posted on <em>Znet</em>.
The speech was broadcast on <em>Democracy Now</em>
(www.webactive.com/pacifica/exile) on October 23 and 24, 2001. A tape
recording of the speech is also available for purchase from
<em>Alternative Radio</em> (www.alternativeradio.org). Streaming audio
is also available on (www.zmag.org/znet/GlobalWatch/chomskymit.htm).

\[11\] Howard Zinn's initial remarks on the September Eleven tragedy
were aired on <em>Democracy Now</em> on September 13, 2001 in an
interview with Amy Goodman (www.webactive/pacifica/exile). Zinn made
similar remarks in an interview with Noelle Hanrahan on <em>Flashpoints
Radio</em> on September 13, 2001 (www.flashpoints.net). A short essay
along the same lines was published in <em>The Progressive</em>, for
November, 2001, "The Old Way of Thinking", pp. 8-9.

\[12\] Howard Zinn's speech in Burlington, Vermont on October 21, 2001
was broadcast on <em>Democracy Now</em> on Oct 22, 2001
(www.webactive/pacifica/exile). A tape recording of the speech is also
available for purchase from <em>Alternative Radio</em>
(www.alternativeradio.org)

\[13\] Rahul Mahajan and Robert Jensen, "A War of Lies", posted on the
<em>Common Dreams News Center</em> web site for October 8, 2001
(www.commondreams.org).

\[14\] James Herod, <em>Getting Free: Creating an Association of
Democratic Autonomous Neighborhoods</em> (2007) is available from AK
Press.

## External Links

- [A Stake, Not a Mistake: On Not Seeing the
  Enemy](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/james-herod-a-stake-not-a-mistake)
  at [theanarchistlibrary.org](theanarchistlibrary.org "wikilink")

[^1]: An excellent book on Yugoslavia which does not suffer from this
    naiveté, the best book so far, that I am aware of, on the bombing,
    is [Michael Parenti](Michael_Parenti "wikilink"), <em>[To Kill a
    Nation: The Attack on
    Yugoslavia](To_Kill_a_Nation:_The_Attack_on_Yugoslavia "wikilink")</em>
    (Verso, 2000, 246 pages).