---
title: Amish
permalink: /Amish/
---

The **Amish** are a [Christian](Christianity "wikilink")
([Anabaptist](Anabaptism "wikilink")) group active in the
[USA](United_States_of_America "wikilink"), [Canada](Canada "wikilink")
and [Argentina](Argentina "wikilink") that live in small,
self-sufficient rural communities famous for their simple dress, sober
and hardworking culture and rejection of electricity. There are about
342,000 Amish in the world and have often been described as resembling
an [anarchist
culture](List_of_Libertarian_Socialist_Societies "wikilink"), although
[anarchists](Anarchism "wikilink") are critical of the group.

## Decision-Making

The Amish are divided into small, independent groups of people that live
together in communities.

The leaders of the Amish churches, their ministers, are chosen by a
process that combines nomination and lot. In some Amish communities, at
the end of a communion service, men and women file past a deacon and
each whispers the name of a nominee. Any man who is nominated by three
or more people is included in the drawing. Each of the nominees is then
handed a song book, one of which contains a slip of paper bearing a
Bible verse. The man who opens his book to discover the verse is
overwhelmed to realize that the Lord has chosen him for a life-long
added responsibility of service to the community. While the details of
the procedures may vary in different congregations, the process of
having divine choice of their leaders prevents quarreling with the
leadership selection process and reaffirms the unity, stability and
authority of their community.

The Amish continue to use older technologies such as the buggy that
serve to define them and separate them from the dominant culture, but
they are sometimes bothered by conflicts over whether or not to adopt
new technologies. Any new device or convenience that some members desire
is carefully examined by the entire community to see if it would foster
differences between families, create tensions, or produce undue
dependence on the outside world. As they consider proposals for change
in the light of their historic values, they resolve the conflicts and
try to preserve unity in their congregations.[^1]

## Foreign Policy

Amish communities are often exempt from various laws and taxes in the
US.[^2]

### Anti-Amish Discrimination

The Amish have, on occasion, encountered discrimination and hostility
from their neighbors. During World War I and World War II, Amish
nonresistance sparked many incidents of harassment, and young Amish men
conscripted into the services were subjected to various forms of ill
treatment. In the present day, anti-Amish sentiment has taken the form
of pelting the horse-drawn carriages used by the Amish with stones or
similar objects as the carriages pass along a road, most commonly at
night. One Amish person was killed after being hit by a bottle in the
head in 1987. Amish are also frequent targets of kidnapping.[^3]

## Crime

Young people sometimes get in trouble with the law, but otherwise the
Amish experience almost no violence or crime. They live in a society,
where harmony, passivity, and quiet discipline are the norm rather than
aggression and hostility.[^4] However, marital rape and sexual abuse of
wives is a rampant problem in Amish communities.

## Economy

Their economy has traditionally consisted of farming, though many have
branched out into rural businesses, such as their bed and breakfast
operations as well as carpentry and leatherworks. Amish business people
interact easily with non-Amish customers and business associates,
understand the competitive, market-driven, profit system, and can
formulate effective strategies for managing their operations. However,
they cannot grow too large because of potential criticism from within
their communities that they’re abandoning traditional values. As a news
story put it in 2010, they have to cope with religious issues that
outsiders don’t face. However, because they like to work hard and don’t
spend money on consumer goods, their non-Amish competitors tend to
resent them.[^5]

## Public Services

### Education

The competition that exists in the Amish schools is group-centered and
not individually oriented. Children will compete against their group’s
previous records—to have a better spelling score than the previous
month, for instance—and they thus encourage one another to perform well
so that the whole class or school will do better. The Amish typically
operate their own one-room schools and discontinue formal education
after grade eight, at age 13 or 14. Until the children turn 16, they
have vocational training under the tutelage of their parents, community,
and the school teacher. Higher education is generally discouraged, as it
can lead to social segregation and the unraveling of the community.
However, some Amish women have used higher education to obtain a nursing
certificate so that they may provide midwifery services to the
community.[^6]

### Health

## Culture

### Childrearing

Children learn to respect the authority of their parents and older
people. Parents teach through firmness and consistency—they may use
corporal punishment, though not harshly. Children are expected to work
at tasks that are within their capability, and young children of both
sexes may help (or accompany) their fathers and mothers around the farm
and perform useful errands. The young children are sheltered from the
outside world and raised in a protective community of people who know
and care for them. Traditional Amish schools try to fuse religion,
morality and education as their one goal.[^7]

### Gelassenheit

The key to understanding Amish culture is the German word
<em>Gelassenheit</em>, “submission,” a belief that includes simplicity,
humility, thrift, obedience, and accepting the will of higher
authorities. The Amish ideal is humility, in contrast to the modern
ideal of personal fulfillment. The Amish person serves others, is guided
by the will of the group, and talks, acts, and dresses modestly.
<em>Gelassenheit </em>implies abandoning one’s will in favor of
following divine will, as the Amish perceive Christ to have done. It
suggests loving one’s enemies, praying for them, and never taking
revenge—as Christ commanded. They adhere to Christ’s command to not
resist evil, which prevents them from employing force in any human
relationship. They cannot file lawsuits, a belief that puts them at a
serious disadvantage when trying to sign contracts with unscrupulous
businesses such as those in the fracking industry. Also, they cannot
serve on a police force or a jury, hold a political office, or engage in
competition. They also believe in volunteering to help those outside
their own community when they feel they can be of assistance.[^8]

### Gender and Marriage

Amish culture is fairly patriarchal. The man is the [head of the
family](Patriarchy "wikilink") and responsible for all the heavier farm
work; the woman follows his leadership in major decisions and is
responsible for child-raising, cooking, cleaning, washing, and
housekeeping. Their relationship is more one of mutual respect than
romantic love: they rarely express affection openly. When a spouse is
irritated about something, he or she will express feelings by gesture,
tone of voice, or just by being silent—perhaps for several days.[^9]

### Pacifism

The Amish are forbidden, they believe, by Christ to become involved in
any warfare or violence. They do not defend themselves if attacked, and
when faced with hostile neighbors or governments they simply abandon
their farms and move. Military service is an absolute contradiction to
the spirit of Amish <em>Gelassenheit</em>.[^10]

### Sense of Self

If modern people are preoccupied with finding themselves, the Amish
focus on losing themselves. They demonstrate proper humility in various
subtle ways: an un-aggressive handshake, a thoughtful, deliberate way of
speaking, a refined smile, and a gentle chuckle rather than cocky
laughter. They are highly conscious of the danger of pride, the
manifestation of individualism, and they try not to call attention to
themselves. They are as eager to avoid taking personal credit for
achievements as outsiders are eager to take credit. Their distinctive,
plain clothing is designed to diminish pride, though traces of it can be
seen at times in fancy harnesses on their buggies or trimmings around
their homes.[^11]

## References

<references />

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:USA](Category:USA "wikilink")
[Category:Canada](Category:Canada "wikilink")
[Category:Argentina](Category:Argentina "wikilink")
[Category:Christianity](Category:Christianity "wikilink")
[Category:North America](Category:North_America "wikilink")
[Category:South America](Category:South_America "wikilink")

[^1]:

[^2]:

[^3]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") -
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amish_life_in_the_modern_world#Crimes_and_discrimination_against_Amish>

[^4]: [Encyclopedia of Peaceful
    Societies](Encyclopedia_of_Peaceful_Societies "wikilink") -
    [Amish](https://cas.uab.edu/peacefulsocieties/societies/amish/)

[^5]:

[^6]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") -
    [Amish](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amish)

[^7]:

[^8]:

[^9]:

[^10]:

[^11]: