---
title: Anarchy Works
permalink: /Anarchy_Works/
---

**Anarchy Works** is a
[book](List_of_Libertarian_Socialist_Media "wikilink") by [Peter
Gelderloos](Peter_Gelderloos "wikilink") aiming to provide a picture at
how an [anarchist
society](List_of_Libertarian_Socialist_Societies "wikilink") might
function, deal with certain problems and fulfill the needs of the
people.

## Summary

### Part 1: Human Nature

#### Aren't people naturally selfish?

The notion of selfishness and [sharing and
generosity](Mutual_Aid "wikilink") are explored. Even in societies which
have endured [capitalism](capitalism "wikilink") for hundreds of years,
people still frequently engage in altruistic behavior like sharing
dinner or helping strangers. The notion of a [gift
economy](Gift_Economy "wikilink") is explored through the economic
practices of the [Semai](Semai "wikilink") in what is now
[Malaysia](Malaysia "wikilink") and [Really Really Free
Markets](Really_Really_Free_Market "wikilink"), a protest movement in
much of the western world.

#### Aren't people naturally competitive?

The concept of [competition](competition "wikilink") has been largely a
product of socialization in the west. But non-capitalist societies often
had very strong concepts of cooperation and even hostility towards
competition. The [Mbuti](Mbuti "wikilink") is what is now Central Africa
are explored in generous detail showing various aspects of how
cooperation runs in all parts of their society, from
[childrearing](childrearing "wikilink") to economic activities to
[gender equality](Gender_Equality "wikilink") as well as the destruction
of Mbuti communities from war backed by capitalists. The activities of
people after [Hurricane Katrina](Hurricane_Katrina "wikilink") are also
explored, how complete strangers were suddenly helping to save the lives
of others whilst the [police](police "wikilink") left them to die and
the [media](Mass_Media "wikilink") spread lies.

#### Haven't humans always been patriarchal?

Numerous societies have existed without
[patriarchy](patriarchy "wikilink") and fluid concepts of
[gender](gender "wikilink") and within patriarchy there has been strong
resistance to it, such as [FIERCE!](FIERCE! "wikilink") - who organize
against [gentrification](gentrification "wikilink"), privatized
[healthcare](healthcare "wikilink") and
[discrimination](discrimination "wikilink"). Another resistance was
[Pocasset](Pocasset "wikilink"), a [colony of
England](Colonialism "wikilink") in what is now the
[US](United_States_of_America "wikilink") during the 1600s, which fought
for [direct democracy](Democratic_Assembly "wikilink"), gender equality,
[indigenous rights](Indigenism "wikilink"), religious freedom, freedom
from [debt](debt "wikilink") and abolition of [punitive justice
systems](Punitive_Justice "wikilink"). Societies outside the west have
also had gender equality and fluid concepts of gender, such as the
pre-colonial [Igbo](Igbo "wikilink") in what is now
[Nigeria](Federal_Republic_of_Nigeria "wikilink"), where women practice
collective self-defense against gender violence and abusive men. The
[Haudenosaunee](Haudenosaunee_Confederacy "wikilink") in what is now the
US and [Canada](Canada "wikilink") are also explored, with women
organizing and leading councils for decision-making and economic
distribution.

#### Aren't people naturally warlike?

The institutions of [power](power "wikilink") - media,
[academics](University "wikilink"),
[government](State_(Polity) "wikilink"),
[religion](Organized_Religion "wikilink") - frequently exaggerate levels
of [warfare](War "wikilink") and [violence](violence "wikilink")
throughout history, especially in areas without the state. Frequently
using heavily biased or outright fabricated research to support their
worldview. But even within the state, people frequently are horrified by
the actual consequences of violence, setting up [protest
camps](Protest_Camp "wikilink") and movements like the [Falsane Peace
Camp](Falsane_Peace_Camp "wikilink") and [Greenham Commons Women's Peace
Camp](Greenham_Commons_Women's_Peace_Camp "wikilink") in the
[UK](United_Kingdom "wikilink"), the [Life and Labor
Commune](Life_and_Labor_Commune "wikilink") in the
[USSR](Union_of_Soviet_Socialist_Republics "wikilink") and the [Catholic
Worker Movement](Catholic_Worker_Movement "wikilink"). Anarchistic
societies like the Semai have some of the lowest murder rates in the
world due to their low levels of [alienation](alienation "wikilink") and
[poverty](poverty "wikilink"), stemming from a policy of gift economics.
War is not a natural fact of human nature, but the consequence of the
structure of society.

#### Aren't domination and authority natural?

It's becoming increasingly harder to ideologically justify the state as
more and more research finds that egalitarian societies are extremely
successful and people still form egalitarian networks and communities
under capitalism. However, it is worth remembering that even
gatherer-hunter societies have had brutal systems of hierarchy and
patriarchy, even going as so far as slavery and gang rape. Whilst plenty
of societies with agriculture and metal tools have been egalitarian.
Hierarchical societies have always generated resistance, with the best
resistances forming 'reverse dominance hierarchies' where leaders were
often killed. The Amazigh in what is now Morocco managed to resist
state-formation for centuries, and resist against the state is common to
all cultures. In Medieval Europe, peasant rebellions against increasing
taxes, privatization of common land and forests and increasing
privileges of the ruling class, notably in the German Peasants Uprising
in 1524 and 1525, where 300,000 slaughtered knights and lords. The
anti-globalization movement across the world has resisted the
establishment of capitalism, notably with the
[Zapatistas](Rebel_Zapatista_Autonomous_Municipalities "wikilink").
Plenty of people have also fled the state, such as those in South
America researched by Pierre Clastres,
[Haudenosaunee](Haudenosaunee_Confederacy "wikilink") in North America,
Cossacks in Russia and Zomia in Southeast Asia.

#### A broader sense of self

[Peter Kropotkin](Peter_Kropotkin "wikilink") famously wrote in his work
on [Mutual Aid](Mutual_Aid:_A_Factor_of_Evolution "wikilink") that
people are more likely to work together than against each-other. The
assumption in the west that small-scale
[forager](Forager_Economy "wikilink") societies are 'primitive' and
large post-industrial societies are 'advanced' and have nothing to learn
from 'primitive people' is at best ignorant and at worst openly
[racist](Racism "wikilink"). All human societies are tremendously
complicated and we can learn a lot from studying them, and in current
social struggles the seeds of a new society are being built.

### Part 2: Decisions

#### How will decisions be made?

#### How will decisions be enforced?

#### How will settle disputes?

#### Meeting in the streets

Hierarchy is simply not capable of making the best responsible decisions
for millions of people. The MST shows that millions can make decisions
at a grassroots level, the Oaxaca Uprising shows us that anarchists can
organize in modern cities and against militaries. Infoshops and
[Kibbutz](Kibbutzim "wikilink") show us that groups can survive even
under capitalism and the Nuer show us how this kind of decision-making
can survive the most brutal forms of colonialism. Most societies in
history have been egalitarian, and we still have the capability to
return to that lifestyle once we liberate ourselves from capitalism and
the state.

### Part 3: Economy

#### Without wages, what is the incentive to work?

#### Don't people need bosses and experts?

#### Who will take out the trash?

#### Who will take care of the elderly and disabled?

#### How will people get healthcare?

#### What about education?

#### What about technology?

#### How will exchange work?

#### What about people who don't want to give up a consumerist lifestyle?

#### What about building and organizing large, spread-out infrastructure?

#### How will cities work?

#### What about drought, famine, or other catastrophes?

#### Meeting our needs without keeping count

### Part 4: Environment

#### What's to stop someone destroying the environment?

#### What about global environmental problems, like climate change?

#### The only way to save the planet

### Part 5: Crime

#### Who will protect us without police?

#### What about gangs and bullies?

#### What's to stop someone killing people?

#### What about rape, domestic violence, and other forms of harm?

#### Beyond individual justice

### Part 6: Revolution

#### How could people organized horizontally possibly overcome the state?

#### How do we know revolutionaries won't become new authorities?

#### How will communities decide to organize themselves at first?

#### How will reparations for past oppression be worked out?

#### How will a common, anti-authoritarian, ecological ethos come about?

#### A revolution that is many revolutions

### Part 7: Neighboring Societies

#### Could an anarchist society defend itself from an authoritarian neighbor?

#### What will we do about societies that remain patriarchal or racist?

#### What will prevent constant warfare and feuding?

#### Networks not borders

### Part 8: The Future

#### Won't the state just reemerge over time?

#### What about other problems we can't foresee?

Anarchist societies will face problems we cannot possibly foresee right
now. In an anarchist society, we would have to invent entirely new
solutions for wholly unpredictable problems. Should we earn the
opportunity, we will do so with joy, getting our hands dirty in the
complexities of life, realizing our vast potential and reaching new
levels of growth and maturity. We need never again surrender the power
to solve our own problems in cooperation with those around us.

#### Making Anarchy Work

Where oppression exists, resistance does to. You can help out by doing
anything from graffiti to armed rebellion against the government. It is
important to support struggles even if they are not explicitly anarchist
and to not ever think you can work within the state or capitalism to
build a freer world.

## External Links

- [Anarchy
  Works](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/peter-gelderloos-anarchy-works)
  at [theanarchistlibrary.org](theanarchistlibrary.org "wikilink")
- [Anarchy
  Works](https://libcom.org/files/Gelderloos%20-%20Anarchy%20Works.pdf)
  at [libcom.org](libcom.org "wikilink")

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Anarchism](Category:Anarchism "wikilink") [Category:Peter
Gelderloos](Category:Peter_Gelderloos "wikilink")