---
title: As We See It (Pamphlet)
permalink: /As_We_See_It_(Pamphlet)/
---

**As We See It**is a 1967 leaflet written by [Chris
Pallis](Chris_Pallis.md "wikilink") and published by
[Solidarity](Solidarity_(UK).md "wikilink"). It is brief plan of action for
creating a socialist society. It was followed up on in 1972 with [As We
Don't See It](As_We_Don't_See_It_(Pamphlet).md "wikilink").

## Transcript

1\. Throughout the world the vast majority of people have no control
whatsoever over the decisions that most deeply and directly affect their
lives. They sell their labour power while others who own or control the
means of production accumulate wealth, make the laws and use the whole
machinery of the [State](State_(Polity).md "wikilink") to perpetuate and
reinforce their privileged positions.

2\. During the past century the living standards of working people have
improved. But neither these improved living standards, nor the
nationalization of the means of production, nor the coming to power of
parties claiming to represent the working class have basically altered
the status of the worker. Nor have they given the bulk of mankind much
freedom outside of production. East and West, capitalism remains an
inhuman type of society where the vast majority are bossed at work and
manipulated in consumption and leisure. Propaganda and policemen,
prisons and schools, traditional values and traditional morality all
serve to reinforce the power of the few and to convince or coerce the
many into acceptance of a brutal, degrading and irrational system. The
"Communist" world is not communist and the "Free" world is not free.

3\. The trade unions and the traditional parties of the left started in
business to change all this. But they have come to terms with the
existing patterns of exploitation. In fact they are now essential if
exploiting society is to continue working smoothly. The unions act as
middlemen in the labour market. The political parties use the struggles
and aspirations of the working class for their own ends. The
degeneration of working class organizations, itself the result of the
failure of the revolutionary movement, has been a major factor in
creating working class apathy, which in turn has led to further
degeneration of both parties and unions.

4\. The trade unions and political parties cannot be reformed,
"captured", or converted into instruments of working class emancipation.
We don't call however for the proclamation of new unions, which in the
conditions of today would suffer a similar fate to the old ones. Nor do
we call for militants to tear up their union cards. Our aims are simply
that the workers themselves should decide on the objectives of their
struggles and that the control and organization of these struggles
should remain firmly in their own hands. The *forms* which this
self-activity of the working class may take will vary considerably from
country to country and from industry to industry. Its basic *content*
will not.

5\. Socialism is not just the [common ownership](Commons.md "wikilink") and
control of the means of production and distribution. It means equality,
real freedom, reciprocal recognition and a radical transformation in all
human relations. It is man's understanding of his environment and of
himself, his domination over his work and over such social institutions
as he may need to create. These are not secondary aspects, which will
automatically follow the expropriation of the ruling class. On the
contrary they are essential parts of the whole process of social
transformation, for without them no genuine social transformation will
have taken place.

6\. A socialist society can therefore only be built from below.
Decisions concerning production and work will be taken by Workers'
Councils composed of elected and revocable delegates. Decisions in other
areas will be taken on the basis of the widest possible discussion and
consultation among the people as a whole. This democratization of
society down to its very roots is what we mean by "workers' power".

7\. *Meaningful action*, for revolutionaries, is whatever increases the
confidence the autonomy, the initiative, the participation, the
solidarity, the equalitarian tendencies and the self-activity of the
masses and whatever assists in their demystification. *Sterile and
harmful action* is whatever reinforces the passivity of the masses,
their apathy, their cynicism, their differentiation through hierarchy,
their alienation, their reliance on others to do things for them and the
degree to which they can therefore be manipulated by others - even by
those allegedly acting on their behalf.

8\. No ruling class in history has ever relinquished its power without a
struggle and our present rulers are unlikely to be an exception. Power
will only be taken from them through the conscious, autonomous action of
the vast majority of the people themselves. The building of socialism
will require mass understanding and mass participation. By their rigid
hierarchical structure, by their ideas and by their activities, both
social-democratic and Bolshevik types of organizations discourage this
kind of understanding and prevent this kind of participation. The idea
that socialism can somehow be achieved by an elite party (however
"revolutionary") acting "on behalf of the working class is both absurd
and reactionary.

9\. We do not accept the view that by itself the working class can only
achieve a trade union consciousness. On the contrary we believe that its
conditions of life and its experiences in production constantly drive
the working class to adopt priorities and values and to find methods of
organization which challenge the established social order and
established pattern of thought. These responses are implicitly
socialist. On the other hand, the working class is fragmented,
dispossessed of the means of communication, and its various sections are
at different levels of awareness and consciousness. The task of the
revolutionary organization is to help give proletarian consciousness an
explicitly socialist content, to give practical assistance to workers in
struggle, and to help those in different areas to exchange experiences
and link up with one another.

10\. We do not see ourselves as yet another leadership, but merely as an
instrument of working class action. The function of *Solidarity* is to
help all those who are in conflict with the present authoritarian social
structure, both in industry and in society at large, to generalize their
experience, to make a total critique of their condition and of its
causes, and to develop the mass revolutionary consciousness necessary if
society is to be totally transformed.

## External Links

- [As We See
  It](https://www.marxists.org/archive/brinton/1967/04/as-we-see-it.htm)
  at marxists.org

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink")
[Category:Pamphlets](Category:Pamphlets.md "wikilink") [Category:Chris
Pallis](Category:Chris_Pallis.md "wikilink") [Category:Solidarity
(UK)](Category:Solidarity_(UK).md "wikilink")