---
title: ASIO
permalink: /ASIO/
---

The **Australian Security Intelligence Organisation** is, officially,
[Australia's](Australia "wikilink") 'national security agency', but much
like its US counter-parts the [CIA](CIA "wikilink") and
[FBI](Federal_Bureau_of_Investigation "wikilink"), it has been far more
involved in suppressing Australia's small leftist population than doing
anything else.

## Notable Activities

### Opposition to the Political Left

The ASIO has consistently been monitoring the political left (and likely
still is) and it has been alleged that the Organisation compiled a list
of some 10,000 suspected leftists who would be arrested should the [Cold
War](Cold_War "wikilink") escalate.[^1]

### Failure to deal with the USSR

### Chilean Military Coup

ASIO agents stationed in Chile in the early 1970s helping the US in the
leadup to the [military coup](Chilean_Military_Coup_(1973) "wikilink")
were ordered to leave, but defied the government and stayed, helping the
CIA overthrow yet another democratic government. This continues a long
string of authoritarian regimes supported by the Australian government,
like [Saudi Arabia](Saudi_Arabia "wikilink") or the [New
Order](New_Order_(Indonesia) "wikilink") in
[Indonesia](Indonesia "wikilink").

### Royal Commission

### Hilton Hotel Bombing

There is significant evidence to suggest that the ASIO might have
orchestrated [the bombing](Sydney_Hilton_Hotel_Bombing "wikilink") or at
least have been aware of the possibility and allowed it to proceed.[^2]

### Spying on Anti-Coal Activists

In 2012 it was exposed that the ASIO had been monitoring groups and
individual that had protested against the coal industry for
[environmental reasons](Environmentalism "wikilink").[^3]

### False Imprisonments

## Terrorist Attacks the ASIO succeeded in Preventing

- 2018: The ASIO intercepted a group of Islamic terrorists from planning
  a large terrorist attack in Melbourne.[^4]

## Terrorist Attacks the ASIO Failed to Prevent

- 2018: The Melbourne CBD stabbings, an ISIS-supporting immigrant
  stabbed 3 people (killing 1) in Melbourne. ASIO had known of the man
  and his links to ISIS, but did nothing.
- 2019: The [Christchurch Mosque
  Shootings](Christchurch_Mosque_Shootings_(2019) "wikilink"), an
  [Australian fascist](Brendon_Tarrant "wikilink") drives to two mosques
  in the city of christchurch, New Zealand and killed 51 people,
  injuring another 49. The ASIO, despite being aware of his violent
  ideological beliefs and access to weapons, did nothing.

## References

<references />

[Category:Organizations](Category:Organizations "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Australia](Category:Australia "wikilink")
[Category:Oceania](Category:Oceania "wikilink")

[^1]: [ABC News (1997) - War on Dissent
    (Archived)](https://web.archive.org/web/20051208235840/http://www.abc.net.au/time/episodes/ep8a.htm#)

[^2]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") -
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sydney_Hilton_Hotel_bombing#Accusations_of_conspiracy>

[^3]: Sydney Morning Herald (2016) - [ASIO Eyes Green
    Groups](https://www.smh.com.au/politics/federal/asio-eyes-green-groups-20120411-1wsba.html)

[^4]: ABC News (2018) - [Melbourne CBD Christmas bomb plot foiled by
    ASIO rookie's chance
    encounter](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-11-15/rookie-asio-officer-thwarted-deadly-terror-attack/10498426)