---
title: Authoritarianism
permalink: /Authoritarianism/
---

**Authoritarianism** refers to a set of philosophies, behaviours and
social structures that encourage unconditional command and obedience and
the fetishisation of [social hierarchy](Social_Hierarchy.md "wikilink").

## Authoritarian States

Although all [states](State_(Polity).md "wikilink") can technically be
considered authoritarian, 'authoritarian' states tend to refer to those
with no or rigged elections, state censorship of the media, restrictions
on internal freedom of movement and repression of individuals or social
movements opposed to the states.

## Authoritarian Personality

The 'Authoritarian Personality' refers to a [personality
trait](Personality.md "wikilink") discussed by several
[philosophers](Philosophy.md "wikilink") and
[psychologists](Psychology.md "wikilink") that indicates a strong
likelihood to either follow or be an authoritarian figure, or one who
excessively commands and obeys. Authoritarian personality is correlated
negatively with openness to new experience, support for individualism,
support for gender equality and positively correlated with higher
approval of violence against minorities or dissenters, prejudiced
beliefs and a lack of critical thinking skills.

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink")
[Category:Authoritarianism](Category:Authoritarianism.md "wikilink")
[Category:Concepts](Category:Concepts.md "wikilink")