---
title: Battle of Ryesgade
permalink: /Battle_of_Ryesgade/
---

The **Battle of Ryesgade** was a nine-day long takeover of several
streets in the Osterbro neighbourhood by
[autonomists](Autonomism.md "wikilink") in Copenhagen,
[Denmark](Denmark.md "wikilink") in [September
1986](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Northern_Europe.md "wikilink").

## Timeline of the Battle

### 14th of September (Sunday)

A thousand people gathered in the centre of Copenhagen to plan a march
to the park to protest the eviction. But suddenly broke away during the
march and ran to the Ryesgade area, confusing the police. Police
attempted to break through the barricades, but the autonomists threw
Molotovs, fireworks, bricks, and slung catapults, driving them back. The
police attempted to attack another side of the area, but were again
fought back, retreating. The barricades were reinforced and a huge
street party began. Hundreds of people slept at the barricades in
preparation for the next attack.[^1]

### 15th of September (Monday)

The police attempted to attack two barricades at the same time and the
autonomists in Ryesgade threw stones and bricks, and broke through one.
But a hundred autonomists attacked them from behind, forcing them to
flee, and the police didn't try to break the barricades again that
day.[^2]

### 16th of September (Tuesday)

The Danish media begins reporting on the situation, denouncing the
autonomists as terrorists and crazy. Parties are held in the Ryesgade
commune, with rock bands performing concerts.[^3]

### 17th of September (Wednesday)

Several corporations offer the government to buy the house.[^4]

### 19th of September (Friday)

Police declare the neighborhood in exceptional circumstances, anyone
trying to get in and out is arrested immediately. [^5]

### 21st of September (Sunday)

Support demonstrations are held in several places in the country and
Sweden and Germany in support of the occupied house.[^6][^7]

### 23rd of September (Tuesday)

In the morning, reporters find the area empty, the squatters had
silently escaped.[^8]

## Ryesgade Commune

The residents of Ryesgade strongly supported the Autonomists, who went
food shopping for elderly residents of the neighborhood who were afraid
to venture out beyond the barricades because of possible police
reprisals. The network of free radio stations in Denmark provided
support for the four hundred people in the Ryesgade by sponsoring open
mike debates and calling for food, blankets, and supplies to be
delivered to the “liberated area.”[^9]

One of the first acts in the commune was to torch a building owned by
Sperry Corporation, a US multinational involved in the production of
Cruise and Pershing missiles. As one autonomist explained: “It’s not
enough to talk. Love is a battle. We are fighting homelessness and
gentrification, but also the [USA](United_States_of_America.md "wikilink"),
South Africa, and capitalism to show our solidarity. Many of us have
been to work in Nicaragua. Now the battle comes home.”[^10]

## References

<references />

[Category:Events](Category:Events.md "wikilink")
[Category:Battles](Category:Battles.md "wikilink") [Category:Libertarian
Socialist Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialism](Category:Libertarian_Socialism.md "wikilink")
[Category:Denmark](Category:Denmark.md "wikilink")
[Category:Europe](Category:Europe.md "wikilink") [Category:Northern
Europe](Category:Northern_Europe.md "wikilink")
[Category:Scandanavia](Category:Scandanavia.md "wikilink")
[Category:1986](Category:1986.md "wikilink")
[Category:1980s](Category:1980s.md "wikilink") [Category:20th
Century](Category:20th_Century.md "wikilink")
[Category:Autonomism](Category:Autonomism.md "wikilink")
[Category:Squatting](Category:Squatting.md "wikilink") [Category:Squatter
Uprisings](Category:Squatter_Uprisings.md "wikilink")
[Category:Uprisings](Category:Uprisings.md "wikilink")
[Category:Anti-Eviction
Actions](Category:Anti-Eviction_Actions.md "wikilink")

[^1]: [Georgy Katsiaficas](Georgy_Katsiaficas.md "wikilink"), [The
    Subversion of Politics](The_Subversion_of_Politics.md "wikilink"), page
    121

[^2]: [Georgy Katsiaficas](Georgy_Katsiaficas.md "wikilink"), [The
    Subversion of Politics](The_Subversion_of_Politics.md "wikilink"), page
    122

[^3]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia.md "wikilink") (Danish) -
    <https://da.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slaget_om_Ryesgade>

[^4]:

[^5]:

[^6]:

[^7]:

[^8]:

[^9]:

[^10]: