---
title: Biennio Rosso
permalink: /Biennio_Rosso/
---

The **Biennio Rosso** (English: "Two Red Years") was a period of intense
social conflict and strikes in Italy during 1919 and 1920. It arguably
led to the emergence of [fascism in Italy](fascism_in_Italy.md "wikilink").

## Background

The socialist and [anarchist](Anarchism.md "wikilink") movement had been
growing in Italy since the 1890s, and following [World War
I](World_War_I.md "wikilink") Italy entered an economic crisis with high
unemployment and political instability.

## Events

The Biennio Rosso was characterised by by factory and land occupations,
mass strikes and [workers'
control](Workers'_Control_in_Italy.md "wikilink"). Socialist organisations
also massively increased in membership

The population was confronted with rising inflation and a significant
increase in the price of basic goods, in a period that extensive
unemployment was aggravated by mass demobilization of the Royal Italian
Army at the end of the war. Association to the trade unions, the Italian
Socialist Party (PSI), and the anarchist movement increased
substantially. The PSI increased its membership to 250,000, and the
major Socialist trade union, the General Confederation of Labour
(*Confederazione Generale del Lavoro*, CGL), reached two million
members, while the anarchist Italian Syndicalist Union (*Unione
Sindacale Italiana*, USI) reached between 300,000 and 500,000
affiliates. The vigour of the anarchists was boosted by the return from
exile of the anarchist leader Errico Malatesta in December
1919.<sup>\[3\]\[4\]</sup>

In Turin and Milan, factory councils – which the leading Italian Marxist
theoretician Antonio Gramsci considered to be the Italian equivalent of
Russia’s soviets<sup>\[5\]</sup> – were formed and many factory
occupations took place under the leadership of revolutionary socialists
and anarcho-syndicalists.<sup>\[6\]\[*better source needed*\]</sup> The
agitations also extended to the agricultural areas of the Padan plain
and were accompanied by peasant strikes, rural unrests and armed
conflicts between left-wing and right-wing militias.

Industrial action and rural unrest increased significantly: there were
1,663 industrial strikes in 1919, compared to 810 in 1913. More than one
million industrial workers were involved in 1919, three times the 1913
figure. The trend continued in 1920, which saw 1,881 industrial strikes.
Rural strikes also increased substantially, from 97 in 1913 to 189 by
1920, with over a million peasants taking action.<sup>\[7\]\[8\]</sup>
On July 20-21, 1919, a general strike was called in solidarity with the
Russian Revolution.<sup>\[6\]</sup>

In April 1920, Turin metal-workers, in particular at the Fiat plants,
went on strike demanding recognition for their 'factory councils', a
demand the PSI and CGL did not support. The 'factory councils' more and
more saw themselves as the models for a new democratically controlled
economy running industrial plants, instead of as a bargaining tool with
employers.<sup>\[2\]</sup> The movement peaked in August and September
1920. Armed metal workers in Milan and Turin occupied their factories in
response to a lockout by the employers. Factory occupations swept the
"industrial triangle" of north-western Italy. Some 400,000 metal-workers
and 100,000 others took part.<sup>\[2\]\[9\]</sup> On September 3, 185
metal-working factories in Turin had been occupied.<sup>\[10\]</sup>

The PSI and CGL failed to see the revolutionary potential of the
movement; had it been maximized and expanded to the rest of Italy, a
revolutionary transformation might have been possible. Most Socialist
leaders were pleased with the struggles in the North, but did little to
capitalize on the impact of the occupations and uprisings. Without the
support and quarantined, the movement for social change gradually
waned.<sup>\[2\]</sup>

## Aftermath

By 1921, the movement was declining due to an industrial crisis that
resulted in massive layoffs and wage cuts. In contrast to passive
demeanor the PSI and CGL, employers and the upcoming fascist did
react.<sup>\[2\]</sup> The revolutionary period was followed by the
violent reaction of the Fascist blackshirts militia (the *Fasci Italiani
di Combattimento*) and eventually by the March on Rome of Benito
Mussolini in October 1922.<sup>\[2\]\[9\]</sup>

A quantitative sociological study of the period by analyzing newspaper
news in the period<sup>\[11\]</sup> (see figure) clearly demonstrates
the evolution of violence acts between the social groups involved.

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink")
[Category:Strikes](Category:Strikes.md "wikilink") [Category:Strike
Wave](Category:Strike_Wave.md "wikilink") [Category:Revolutions of 1916 -
1923](Category:Revolutions_of_1916_-_1923.md "wikilink")
[Category:Italy](Category:Italy.md "wikilink")
[Category:Europe](Category:Europe.md "wikilink") [Category:Western
Europe](Category:Western_Europe.md "wikilink")
[Category:1919](Category:1919.md "wikilink")
[Category:1910s](Category:1910s.md "wikilink")
[Category:1920s](Category:1920s.md "wikilink")
[Category:1920](Category:1920.md "wikilink") [Category:20th
Century](Category:20th_Century.md "wikilink")