---
title: Binefar
permalink: /Binefar/
---

**Binefar** is a small town in Aragon, [Spain](Spain "wikilink"), with
around 9,288 residents. It was a part of [Revolutionary
Spain](Revolutionary_Spain "wikilink") during the [Spanish Civil
War](Spanish_Civil_War "wikilink").

## Revolution

On the 20th of July, fascists barricaded themselves into military
barracks, and [anarcho-syndicalist](Anarcho-Syndicalism "wikilink")
workers battled them, defeating them in just an hour. [Popular
assemblies](Democratic_Assembly "wikilink") were set up and a month
later agreed to abolish private ownership of land. Twelve hundred
hectares of land were collectivised. The land was divided into parcels.
Seven work groups cultivate the collectivised land. The group delegates
meet each evening at the meeting hall to exchange impressions and
benefit from the lessons of experience.

At the time, there were only 5,000 people, and the CNT was the only
organisation, and it issued vouchers as money, and issued many goods and
healthcare freely. The town sent two trucks of food to the front lines
of the war everyday, and 32 truckloads to Madrid.

The town suffered a shortage of workers due to most young men going to
the army. Despite this, the town expanded its electric grid, telephone
coverage, established a hospital and other collective buildings.
Consumption and living standards improved for the majority of the
population despite the war.

## References

[Augustin Souchy](Augustin_Souchy "wikilink") - [With The Peasants of
Aragon](https://libcom.org/history/peasants-aragon)

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Spain](Category:Spain "wikilink") [Category:Revolutionary
Spain](Category:Revolutionary_Spain "wikilink")