---
title: Black Spring (Algeria)
permalink: /Black_Spring_(Algeria)/
---

The **Black Spring** was an [indigenist
uprising](List_of_Libertarian_Socialist_Revolutions "wikilink")
coordinated predominately by [Amazigh](Amazigh "wikilink") people in
Kabylie, [Algeria](People's_Democratic_Republic_of_Algeria "wikilink")
in
[2001](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Northern_Africa "wikilink").

## Background

Amazigh people had face hundreds of years of war and genocide, the
expropriation of land, destruction of culture and racist practices from
the Algerian population. The killing of an Amazigh teenager by
[police](police "wikilink") on the 18th of April, 2001 and the arresting
of his friends in suspicious circumstances led to riots.[^1]

## Events

Starting of the 21st of April, people began fighting with police,
burning down police stations, welfare offices, government buildings and
the offices of all [political parties](Political_Party "wikilink").
After police were removed from the region, not only was there very
little crime[^2] but further protests into the capital of Algiers were
organized.[^3] Despite pressure to institutionalize from
[academics](University "wikilink") and NGOs to form political parties or
charities, the protesters continued to use insurrectionary tactics and
rejected the measures of the state.[^4]

## Results

The uprising led to the withdrawing of police and military units from
the whole of Kabylie, the reinstantement of the traditional djemmâa
system of [popular assembly](Democratic_Assembly "wikilink") to replace
the [state](State_(Polity) "wikilink") and the recongition of Tamazight,
the Amazigh language across Algeria.[^5]

## References

<references />

[Category:Algeria](Category:Algeria "wikilink")
[Category:Uprisings](Category:Uprisings "wikilink")
[Category:Indigenism](Category:Indigenism "wikilink")
[Category:Indigenist
Uprisings](Category:Indigenist_Uprisings "wikilink") [Category:Northern
Africa](Category:Northern_Africa "wikilink")
[Category:Africa](Category:Africa "wikilink")
[Category:2000s](Category:2000s "wikilink")
[Category:2001](Category:2001 "wikilink") [Category:Libertarian
Socialist Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")

[^1]: Jaime Semprun, (2002) <em>Apología por la Insurrección
    Argelina</em>

[^2]: [CrimethInc](CrimethInc "wikilink") -
    <https://crimethinc.com/2017/11/02/other-rojavas-echoes-of-the-free-commune-of-barbacha-an-autonomous-uprising-in-north-africa-2012-2014>

[^3]:

[^4]: [Peter Gelderloos](Peter_Gelderloos "wikilink") (2010) [Anarchy
    Works](Anarchy_Works "wikilink"), pages 205 - 213

[^5]: [Peter Gelderloos](Peter_Gelderloos "wikilink") (2015) [The
    Failure of Nonviolence](The_Failure_of_Nonviolence "wikilink")