---
title: Boroo Gold Mine Strike (2009)
permalink: /Boroo_Gold_Mine_Strike_(2009)/
---

The **Boroo Gold Mine Strike** was a
[2009](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Northern_Asia "wikilink")
strike by [mineworkers](Mining "wikilink") in Selenge, Mongolia against
unsafe working conditions and [low wages](Wage_Labour "wikilink").

## Background

### Cyanide Leak

[Workers](Working_Class "wikilink") at Boroo reported water sources near
the mine being contaminated with cyanide leakage from the mine, which
had been actively ignored by government officials and safety
inspectors.[^1]

### Wage Gaps

Many workers were angry at the disparity of wages and conditions between
themselves and expat workers brought in by the company. Disclosures on
the internet revealed that they received 30 to 40 times more than
locals. “Expats are pampered—they even have personal bodyguards when
they go out clubbing” one worker said.[^2]

### Severance Pay

The union was demanding 9.4 million USD severance pay in total, less
than 1 per cent of the company’s profit, but initially all the company
offered was 3 months salary. Management has also been accused of
mistreating workers, threatening to fire them and making derogatory
comments. The head of Boroo, John Kazakoff was alleged to say that
workers would have been herding livestock without Boroo.[^3]

## Events

Over one hundred workers pitched tents outside the gate and blocked the
main entrance. Another 200 staged a stay-in strike. The mine manager
responded by terminating all food provisions, and workers in turn by
[blocked](Blockade "wikilink") internal roads.[^4]

## Results

The license held by the mining company was suspended, and workers were
offered greater severance packages, ending the strike.[^5]

## References

<references />

[Category:Mongolia](Category:Mongolia "wikilink")
[Category:Asia](Category:Asia "wikilink") [Category:Northern
Asia](Category:Northern_Asia "wikilink") [Category:List of
Strikes](Category:List_of_Strikes "wikilink")
[Category:Strikes](Category:Strikes "wikilink")
[Category:Mining](Category:Mining "wikilink") [Category:Libertarian
Socialist Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:2009](Category:2009 "wikilink")
[Category:2000s](Category:2000s "wikilink") [Category:21st
Century](Category:21st_Century "wikilink")

[^1]: <https://libcom.org/news/mongolia-strike-gold-mine-ends-partial-victory-08072009>

[^2]:

[^3]:

[^4]:

[^5]: <https://www.proactiveinvestors.co.uk/companies/amp/news/70490>