---
title: British Miners' Strike (1972)
permalink: /British_Miners'_Strike_(1972)/
---

The **British Miners' Strike of 1972** was a nationwide (although not
[general](General_Strike.md "wikilink"))
[strike](List_of_Strikes.md "wikilink") by coal miners across the [United
Kingdom](United_Kingdom.md "wikilink") in protest of low wages.

## Background

The strike occurred after wage negotiations between the unions and coal
industry had broken down. It was the first time since
[1926](British_General_Strike_(1926).md "wikilink") that British miners had
officially gone on strike (although there had been unofficial strikes,
as recently as 1969). Additionally, job security had been undermined as
coal mines were shut down throughout the 1960s.

## Events

The strike began in early January, with miners sending
[pickets](Picketing.md "wikilink") across their mines and asking for
solidarity strikes (which railworkers and power station workers agreed
to). Power shortages emerged, and a state of emergency was declared on 9
February, after the weather had turned cold unexpectedly and voltage had
been reduced across the entire national grid.

A miner from Hatfield Colliery, near Doncaster, Freddie Matthews, was
killed by a lorry while he was picketing on 3 February 1972, and a huge
crowd attended his funeral.<sup>\[10\]</sup> The non-union lorry driver
had mounted the pavement to pass the picket line and struck Matthews in
the process.<sup>\[11\]</sup> In the aftermath of the death, the
picketing in the Doncaster area became more violent, with clashes
reported with the NACODS members at Markham Main and
Kilnhurst.<sup>\[11\]</sup> Tom Swain, Labour MP to Derbyshire North
East, remarked, "This could be the start of another Ulster in the
Yorkshire coalfield."<sup>\[11\]</sup> He threatened to "advocate
violence" if an immediate government statement were not made on
Matthews's death.<sup>\[11\]</sup>

The strike lasted seven weeks and ended after miners agreed to a pay
offer on 19 February.<sup>\[12\]</sup> The offer came after the Battle
of Saltley Gate, when around 2,000 NUM pickets descended on a coke works
in Birmingham and were later joined by thousands of workers from other
industries in Birmingham.<sup>\[13\]</sup>

The result was characterised as a "victory for violence" by the
Conservative Cabinet at the time, in reference to some clashes between
miners and police and to some throwing of stones and bottles at lorries
trying to pass the pickets.<sup>\[14\]</sup>

## Planned strikebreaking force

A volunteer force was planned in Scotland to break the miners' pickets
during the strike. After release of government papers under the
thirty-year rule, it has been revealed that civil servants, police,
local authorities and other organisations worked on a secret project to
gather hundreds of drivers to supply the country's power stations during
the strike.<sup>\[15\]</sup>

A Royal Air Force base was to be used for the unit.<sup>\[15\]</sup>
They were to have between 400 and 600 trucks and
drivers.<sup>\[15\]</sup> Fire brigades were also contacted to provide
off-duty staff and volunteer groups to cater for the coal
convoys.<sup>\[15\]</sup> The role of the volunteers was to drive in
convoys to break the picketlines blocking the supply of coal to the
Scottish power plants.<sup>\[15\]</sup> The plans were never put into
the place because the dispute was brought to a close.<sup>\[15\]</sup>

## Wilberforce Inquiry

An inquiry into miners' pay, chaired by Lord Wilberforce, was set up by
the government in February 1972, as the strike was drawing to a close.
It reported a week later. It recommended pay increases of between £4.50
and £6 per week.<sup>\[16\]</sup> Lord Wilberforce defended the
increases, which represented a 27% pay rise,<sup>\[17\]</sup> by saying
that "we know of no other job in which there is such a combination of
danger, health hazard, discomfort in working conditions, social
inconvenience and community isolation."<sup>\[16\]</sup> Mine workers
held out for an extra £1 per week, but eventually settled for a package
of "fringe benefits" worth a total of £10 million.<sup>\[17\]</sup>

## Creation of COBR

The inadequacy of the government's response to the strike provoked
re-evaluation of emergency planning. The Cabinet Office Briefing Room
(known as COBR) was created to coordinate responses to national and
regional crises, and is still used in British Government
today.<sup>\[18\]</sup>

##