---
title: C.1.1 (An Anarchist FAQ)
permalink: /C.1.1_(An_Anarchist_FAQ)/
---

**C.1.1 Is economics really value free?** is the second chapter of
[Section
C](Section_C:_What_are_the_myths_of_capitalist_economics?_(An_Anarchist_FAQ).md "wikilink")
of [An Anarchist FAQ](An_Anarchist_FAQ.md "wikilink").

## Transcript

Modern economists try and portray economics as a “value-free
[science](science.md "wikilink").” Of course, it rarely dawns on them that
they are usually just taking existing social structures for granted and
building economic dogmas around them, so justifying them. At best, as
[Kropotkin](Peter_Kropotkin.md "wikilink") pointed out: “\[A\]ll the
so-called laws and theories of [political
economy](Political_Economy.md "wikilink") are in reality no more than
statements of the following nature: ‘Granting that there are always in a
country a considerable number of [people who cannot subsist a month, or
even a fortnight, without earning a salary](Working_Class.md "wikilink")
and accepting for that purpose the conditions of work imposed upon them
by the [State](State_(Polity).md "wikilink"), or offered to them by those
whom the [State recognises as owners ofland, factories, railways,
etc.](Capitalism.md "wikilink"), then the results will be so and so. ’“So
far academic political economy has been only an enumeration of what
happens under these conditions — without distinctly stating the
conditions themselves. And then, having described the facts which arise
in our society under these conditions, they represent to us these facts
as rigid, inevitable economic laws.”
[Anarchism]([Anarchism_(Kropotkin_Pamphlet).md "wikilink"), p. 179\]

In other words, economists usually take the political and economic
aspects of capitalist society (such as [property
rights](Property_Rights.md "wikilink"),
[inequality](Economic_Inequality.md "wikilink") and so on) as given and
construct their theories around it. At best. At worse, economics is
simply speculation based on the necessary assumptions required to prove
the desired end. By some strange coincidence these ends usually bolster
the power and [profits](Profit.md "wikilink") of the few and show that the
free market is the best of all possible worlds. [Alfred
Marshall](Alfred_Marshall.md "wikilink"), one of the founders of
[neoclassical economics](Neoclassical_Economics.md "wikilink"), once noted
the usefulness of economics to the elite: “From Metaphysics I went to
Ethics, and found that the justification of the existing conditions of
society was not easy. A friend, who had read a great deal of what are
called the Moral Sciences, constantly said: ‘Ah! if you understood
Political Economy you would not say that’” \[quoted by [Joan
Robinson](Joan_Robinson.md "wikilink"), Collected Economic Papers, vol.4,
p. 129\] Joan Robinson added that “\[n\]owadays, of course, no one would
put it so crudely. Nowadays, the hidden persuaders are concealed behind
scientific objectivity, carefully avoiding value judgements; they are
persuading all the better so.” \[Op. Cit., p. 129\]

The way which economic theory systematically says what
[bosses](Boss.md "wikilink") and the wealthy want to hear is just one of
those strange co-incidences of life, one which seems to befall economics
with alarming regularity. How does economics achieve this strange
co-incidence, how does the “value free” “science” end up being wedded to
producing apologetics for the current system? A key reason is the lack
of concern about history, about how the current distribution of income
and wealth was created. Instead, the current distribution of wealth and
income is taken for granted. This flows, in part, from the static nature
of neoclassical economics. If your economic analysis starts and ends
with a snapshot of time, with a given set of commodities, then how those
commodities get into a specific set of hands can be considered
irrelevant — particularly when you modify your theory to exclude the
possibility of proving income redistribution will increase overall
utility (see section [C.1.3](C.1.3_(An_Anarchist_FAQ).md "wikilink")).

It also flows from the social role of economics as defender of
capitalism. By taking the current distribution of income and wealth as
given, then many awkward questions can be automatically excluded from
the “science.” This can be seen from the rise of neoclassical economics
in the 1870s and 1880s. The break between classical political economy
and economics was marked by a change in the kind of questions being
asked. In the former, the central focus was on distribution, growth,
production and the relations between social classes. The exact
determination of individual prices was of little concern, particularly
in the short run. For the new economics, the focus became developing a
rigorous theory of price determination. This meant abstracting from
production and looking at the amount of goods available at any given
moment of time. Thus economics avoided questions about class relations
by asking questions about individual utility, so narrowing the field of
analysis by asking politically harmless questions based on unrealistic
models (for all its talk of rigour, the new economics did not provide an
answer to how real prices were determined any more than classical
economics had simply because its abstract models had no relation to
reality).

It did, however, provide a naturalistic justification for capitalist
social relations by arguing that profit,
[interest](Interest_(Finance).md "wikilink") and [rent](rent.md "wikilink")
are the result of individual decisions rather than the product of a
specific social system. In other words, economics took the classes of
capitalism, internalised them within itself, gave them universal
application and, by taking for granted the existing distribution of
wealth, justified the class structure and differences in market power
this produces. It does not ask (or investigate) why some people own all
the [land](land.md "wikilink") and
[capital](Capital_(Economics).md "wikilink") while the vast majority have
to sell their labour on the market to survive. As such, it internalises
the class structure of capitalism. Taking this class structure as a
given, economics simply asks the question how much does each “factor”
(labour, land, capital) contribute to the production of goods.

Alfred Marshall justified this perspective as follows: “In the long run
the earnings of each agent (of production) are, as a rule, sufficient
only to recompense the sum total of the efforts and sacrifices required
to produce them... with a partial exception in the case of land ...
especially much land in old countries, if we could trace its record back
to their earliest origins. But the attempt would raise controversial
questions in history and ethics as well as in economics; and the aims of
our present inquiry are prospective rather than retrospective.”
\[Principles of Economics, p.832\] Which is wonderfully handy for those
who benefited from the [theft](Enclosure.md "wikilink") of the [common
heritage of humanity](Commons.md "wikilink"). Particularly as Marshall
himself notes the dire consequences for those without access to the
means of life on the market: “When a workman is in fear of hunger, his
need of money is very great; and, if at starting he gets the worst of
the bargaining, it remains great ... That is all the more probably
because, while the advantage in bargaining is likely to be pretty well
distributed between the two sides of a market for commodities, it is
more often on the side of the buyers than on that of the sellers in a
market for labour.” \[Op. Cit., pp. 335–6\]

Given that market exchanges will benefit the stronger of the parties
involved, this means that inequalities become stronger and more secure
over time. Taking the current [distribution of
property](Private_Property.md "wikilink") as a given (and, moreover,
something that must not be changed) then the market does not correct
this sort of injustice. In fact, it perpetuates it and, moreover, it has
no way of compensating the victims as there is no mechanism for ensuring
reparations. So the impact of previous acts of aggression has an impact
on how a specific society developed and the current state of the world.
To dismiss “retrospective” analysis as it raises “controversial
questions" and “ethics” is not value-free or objective science, it is
pure ideology and skews any “prospective” enquiry into apologetics. This
can be seen when Marshall noted that labour “is often sold under special
disadvantages, arising from the closely connected group of facts that
labour power is ‘perishable,’ that the sellers of it are commonly poor
and have no reserve fund, and that they cannot easily withhold it from
the market.” Moreover, the “disadvantage, wherever it exists, is likely
to be cumulative in its effects.” Yet, for some reason, he still
maintains that “wages of every class of labour tend to be equal to the
net product due to the additional labourer of this class.” \[Op. Cit.,
p. 567, p. 569 and p. 518\]

Why should it, given the noted fact that workers are at a disadvantage
in the market place? Hence [Malatesta](Errico_Malatesta.md "wikilink"):
“Landlords, capitalists have robbed the people, with violence and
dishonesty, of the land and all the means of production, and in
consequence of this initial theft can each day take away from workers
the product of their labour.”[Errico Malatesta: His Life and
Ideas]([Errico_Malatesta:_His_Life_and_Ideas_(Book).md "wikilink"), p.
168\] As such, how could it possibly be considered “scientific” or
“value-free” to ignore history? It is hardly “retrospective” to analyse
the roots of the current disadvantage working class people have in the
current and "prospective" labour market, particularly given that
Marshall himself notes their results. This is a striking example of what
Kropotkin deplored in economics, namely that in the rare situations when
social conditions were “mentioned, they were forgotten immediately, to
bespoken of no more.” Thus reality is mentioned, but any impact this may
have on the distribution of income is forgotten for otherwise you would
have to conclude, with the anarchists, that the “appropriation of the
produce of human labour by the owners of capital \[and land\] exists
only because millions of men \[and women\] have literally nothing to
live upon, unless they sell their labour force and their intelligence at
a price that will make the net profit of the capitalist and ‘[surplus
value](Surplus_Value.md "wikilink")’ possible.” [Evolution and
Environment]([Evolution_and_Environment_(Kropotkin_Book).md "wikilink"), p.
92 and p. 106\]

This is important, for respecting property rights is easy to talk about
but it only faintly holds some water if the existing property ownership
distribution is legitimate. If it is illegitimate, if the current
property titles were the result of theft, corruption, colonial conquest,
state intervention, and other forms of coercion then things are
obviously different. That is why economics rarely, if ever, discusses
this. This does not, of course, stop economists arguing against current
interventions in the market (particularly those associated with the
[welfare state](Welfare_State.md "wikilink")). In effect, they are arguing
that it is okay to reap the benefits of past initiations of force but it
is wrong to try and rectify them. It is as if someone walks into a room
of people, robs them at gun point and then asks that they should respect
each others property rights from now on and only engage in voluntary
exchanges with what they had left. Any attempt to establish a moral case
for the “[free market](Free_Market_Economy.md "wikilink")” in such
circumstances would be unlikely to succeed.

This is free market capitalist economics in a nutshell: never mind past
injustices, let us all do the best we can given the current allocations
of resources. Many economists go one better. Not content in ignoring
history, they create little fictional stories in order to justify their
theories or the current distribution of wealth and income. Usually, they
start from isolated individual or a community of approximately equal
individuals (ac ommunity usually without any communal institutions). For
example, the “waiting” theories of profit and interest (see section
[C.2.7](C.2.7_(An_Anarchist_FAQ).md "wikilink")) requires such a fiction to
be remotely convincing. It needs to assume a community marked by basic
equality of wealth and income yet divided into two groups of people, one
of which was industrious and farsighted who abstained from directly
consuming the products created by their own labour while the other was
lazy and consumed their income without thought of the future. Over time,
the descendants of the diligent came to own the means of life while the
descendants of the lazy and the prodigal have, to quote Marx, “nothing
to sell but themselves.” In that way, modern day profits and interest
can be justified by appealing to such “insipid childishness.”
[Capital]([Das_Kapital.md "wikilink"), vol. 1, p. 873\]

The real history of the rise of capitalism is, as we discuss in section
[F.8](F.8_(An_Anarchist_FAQ).md "wikilink"), grim. Of course, it may be
argued that this is just a model and an abstraction and, consequently,
valid to illustrate a point. Anarchists disagree. Yes, there is often
the need for abstraction in studying an economy or any other complex
system, but this is not an abstraction, it is propaganda and a
historical invention used not to illustrate an abstract point but rather
a specific system of power and class. That these little parables and
stories have all the necessary assumptions and abstractions required to
reach the desired conclusions is just one of those co-incidences which
seem to regularly befall economics.The strange thing about these
fictional stories is that they are given much more credence than real
history within economics. Almost always, fictional “history” will always
top actual history in economics.

If the actual history of capitalism is mentioned, then the defenders of
capitalism will simply say that we should not penalise current holders
of capital for actions in the dim and distant past (that current and
future generations of workers are penalised goes unmentioned). However,
the fictional “history” of capitalism suffers from no such dismissal,
for invented actions in the dim and distant past justify the current
owners holdings of wealth and the income that generates. In other words,
heads I win, tails you loose. Needless to say, this (selective) myopia
is not restricted to just history. It is applied to current situations
as well. Thus we find economists defending current economic systems as
“free market” regimes in spite of obvious forms of state intervention.
As [Chomsky](Noam_Chomsky.md "wikilink") notes: “when people talk about ...
free-market ‘trade forces’ inevitably kicking all these people out of
work and driving the whole world towards a kind of a Third World-type
polarisation of wealth ... that’s true if you take a narrow enough
perspective on it. But if you look into the factors that made things the
way they are, it doesn’t even come close to being true, it’s not
remotely in touch with reality. But when you’re studying economics in
the ideological institutions, that’s all irrelevant and you’re not
supposed to ask questions like these.” [Understanding
Power]([Understanding_Power_(Book).md "wikilink"), p. 260\]

To ignore all that and simply take the current distribution of wealth
and income as given and then argue that the “free market” produces the
best allocation of resources is staggering. Particularly as the claim of
“efficient allocation” does not address the obvious question:
“efficient” for whose benefit? For the idealisation of freedom in and
through the market ignores the fact that this freedom is very limited in
scope to great numbers of people as well as the consequences to the
individuals concerned by the distribution of purchasing power amongst
them that the market throws up (rooted, of course in the original
endowments). Which, of course, explains why, even if these parables of
economics were true, anarchists would still oppose capitalism. We extend
[Thomas Jefferson’s](Thomas_Jefferson.md "wikilink") comment that the
“earth belongs always to the living generation” to economic institutions
as well as political — the past should not dominate the present and the
future (Jefferson :“Can one generation bind another and all others in
succession forever? I think not.The Creator has made the earth for the
living, not for the dead. Rights and powers can only belong to persons,
not to things, not to mere matter unendowed with will”).

For, as Malatesta argued, people should “not have the right ... to
subject people to their rule and even less of bequeathing to the
countless successions of their descendants the right to dominate and
exploit future generations.”[At the
Cafe]([At_the_Cafe_(Book).md "wikilink"), p. 48\] Then there is the strange
co-incidence that “value free” economics generally ends up blaming all
the problems of capitalism on workers.
[Unemployment](Unemployment.md "wikilink")?
[Recession](Business_Cycle.md "wikilink")? Low growth?
[Wages](Wage_Labour.md "wikilink") are too high! Proudhon summed up
capitalist economic theory well when he stated that "Political economy —
that is, proprietary despotism — can never be in the wrong: it must be
the proletariat.” [System of Economical
Contradictions]([System_of_Economical_Contradictions_(Book).md "wikilink"),
p. 187\] And little has changed since 1846 (or 1776!) when it comes to
economics “explaining” capitalism’s problems (such as the business cycle
or unemployment).

As such, it is hard to consider economics as “value free” when
economists regularly attack unions while being silent or supportive of
big business. According to
[neo-classical](Neoclassical_Economics.md "wikilink") economic theory, both
are meant to be equally bad for the economy but you would be hard
pressed to find many economists who would urge the breaking up of
corporations into a multitude of small firms as their theory demands,
the number who will thunder against “monopolistic” labour is
substantially higher (ironically, as we note in section
[C.1.4](C.1.4_(An_Anarchist_FAQ).md "wikilink"), their own theory shows
that they must urge the break up of corporations or support unions for,
otherwise, unorganised labour is exploited). Apparently arguing that
high wages are always bad but high profits are always good is value
free.

So while big business is generally ignored (in favour of arguments that
the economy works “as if” it did not exist), unions are rarely given
such favours. Unlike, say, [transnational
corporations](Corporation.md "wikilink"), [unions](Trade_Union.md "wikilink")
are considered [monopolistic](Monopoly.md "wikilink"). Thus we see the
strange situation of economists (or economics influenced ideologies like
right-wing “libertarians”) enthusiastically defending companies that
raise their prices in the wake of, say, a [natural
disaster](Natural_Disasters.md "wikilink") and making windfall profits
while, at the same time, attacking workers who decide to raise their
wages by striking for being selfish. It is, of course, unlikely that
they would let similar charges against bosses pass without comment. But
what can you expect from an ideology which presents unemployment as a
good thing (namely, increased leisure — see section
[C.1.5](C.1.5_(An_Anarchist_FAQ).md "wikilink")) and being rich as,
essentially, a disutility (the pain of abstaining from present
consumption falls heaviest on those with wealth — see section
[C.2.7](C.2.7_(An_Anarchist_FAQ).md "wikilink")). Ultimately, only
economists would argue, with a straight face, that the billionaire owner
of a transnational corporation is exploited when the workers in his
sweatshops successfully form a union (usually in the face of the
economic and political power wielded by their boss).

Yet that is what many economists argue: the transnational corporation is
not a monopoly but the union is and monopolies exploit others! Of
course, they rarely state it as bluntly as that. Instead they suggest
that unions get higher wages for their members be forcing other workers
to take less pay (i.e. by exploiting them). So when bosses break unions
they are doing this not to defend their profits and power but really to
raise the standard of other, less fortunate, workers? Hardly. In
reality, of course, the reason why unions are so disliked by economics
is that bosses, in general, hate them. Under capitalism, labour is a
cost and higher wages means less profits (all things being equal). Hence
the need to demonise unions, for one of the less understood facts is
that while unions increase wages for members, they also increase wages
for non-union workers.

This should not be surprising as non-union companies have to raise wages
stop their workers unionising and to compete for the best workers who
will be drawn to the better pay and conditions of union shops (as we
discuss in section [C.9](C.9_(An_Anarchist_FAQ).md "wikilink"), the
neoclassical model of the labour market is seriously flawed). Which
brings us to another key problem with the claim that economics is “value
free,” namely the fact that it takes the current class system of
capitalism and its distribution of wealth as not only a fact but as an
ideal. This is because economics is based on the need to be able to
differentiate between each factor of production in order to determine if
it is being used optimally. In other words, the given class structure of
capitalism is required to show that an economy uses the available
resources efficiently or not. It claims to be “value free” simply
because it embeds the economic relationships of capitalist society into
its assumptions about nature.

Yet it is impossible to define profit, rent and interest independently
of the class structure of any given society. Therefore, this “type of
distribution is the peculiarity of capitalism. Under
[feudalism](feudalism.md "wikilink") the surplus was extracted as land
rent. In an artisan economy each commodity is produced by a men with his
own tools; the distinction between wages and profits has no meaning
there.” This means that “the very essence of the theory is bound up with
a particular institution — wage labour. The central doctrine is that
‘wages tend to equal marginal product of labour.’ Obviously this has no
meaning for a [peasant](Peasants.md "wikilink")
[household](Household_(Economics).md "wikilink") where all share the work
and the income of their holding according to the rules of
[family](family.md "wikilink") life; nor does it apply in a
[co-operative]([Cooperative.md "wikilink")\] where, the [workers’
council](Workers'_Council.md "wikilink") has to decide wha tpart of net
proceeds to allot to investment, what part to a welfare found and what
part to distribute as wage.” \[Joan Robinson, Collected Economic Papers,
p. 26 and p. 130\]

This means that the “universal” principles of economics end up by making
any economy which does not share the core social relations of capitalism
inherently “inefficient.” If, for example, workers own all three
“factors of production” (labour, land and capital) then the “value-free”
laws of economics concludes that this will be inefficient. As there is
only “income”, it is impossible to say which part of it is attributable
to labour, land or machinery and, consequently, if these factors are
being efficiently used. This means that the “science” of economics is
bound up with the current system and its specific class structure and,
therefore, as a “ruling class paradigm, the competitive model” has the
“substantial” merit that “it can be used to rule off the agenda any
proposals for substantial reform or intervention detrimental to large
economic interests ... as the model allows (on its assumptions) a formal
demonstration that these would reduce efficiency.” \[Edward S.
Herman,“The Selling of Market Economics,”pp. 173–199, New Ways of
Knowing, Marcus G. Raskin and Herbert J. Bernstein (eds.), p. 178\]

Then there are the methodological assumptions based on
[individualism](individualism.md "wikilink"). By concentrating on
individual choices, economics abstracts from the social system within
which such choices are made and what influences them. Thus, for example,
the analysis of the causes of poverty is turned towards the failings of
individuals rather than the system as a whole (to be poor becomes a
personal stigma). That the reality on the ground bears little
resemblance to the myth matters little — when people with two jobs still
fail to earn enough to feed their families, it seems ridiculous to call
them lazy or selfish. It suggests a failure in the system, not in the
poor themselves. An individualistic analysis is guaranteed to exclude,
by definition, the impact of class, inequality, [social
hierarchies](Social_Hierarchy.md "wikilink") and [economic/social
power](Power_(Society).md "wikilink") and any analysis of any inherent
biases in a given economic system, its distribution of wealth and,
consequently, its distribution of income between classes. This
abstracting of individuals from their social surroundings results in the
generating economic “laws” which are applicable for all individuals, in
all societies, for all times. This results in all concrete instances, no
matter how historically different, being treated as expressions of the
same universal concept. In this way the uniqueness of contemporary
society, namely its basis in wage labour, is ignored (“The period
through which we are passing ... is distinguished by a special
characteristic — WAGES.” [Proudhon]([Pierre-Joseph_Proudhon.md "wikilink"),
Op. Cit., p. 199\]).

Such a perspective cannot help being ideological rather than scientific.
By trying to create a theory applicable for all time (and so,
apparently, value free) they just hide the fact their theory assumes and
justifies the inequalities of capitalism (for example, the assumption of
given needs and distribution of wealth and income secretly introduces
the social relations of the current society back into the model,
something which the model had supposedly abstracted from). By stressing
individualism, scarcity and competition, in reality economic analysis
reflects nothing more than the dominant ideological conceptions found in
capitalist society. Every few economic systems or societies in the
history of humanity have actually reflected these aspects of capitalism
(indeed, a lot of [state
violence](Violence#Organisational_Violence.md "wikilink") has been used to
create these conditions by breaking up traditional forms of society,
property rights and customs in favour of those desired by the current
ruling elite). The very general nature of the various theories of
profit, interest and rent should send alarm bells ringing. Their authors
construct these theories based on the deductive method and stress how
they are applicable in every social and economic system.

In other words, the theories are just that, theories derived
independently of the facts of the society they are in. It seems somewhat
strange, to say the least, to develop a theory of, say, interest
independently of the class system within which it is charged but this is
precisely what these “scientists” do. It is understandable why. By
ignoring the current system and its classes and hierarchies, the
economic aspects of this system can be justified in terms of appeals to
universal human existence. This will raise less objections than saying,
for example, that interest exists because the rich will only part with
their [money](money.md "wikilink") if they get more in return and the poor
will pay for this because they have little choice due to their
socioeconomic situation. Far better to talk about “time preference”
rather than the reality of class society (see section
[C.2.6](C.2.6_(An_Anarchist_FAQ).md "wikilink")). Neoclassical economics,
in effect, took the “political” out of “political economy” by taking
capitalist society for granted along with its class system, its
hierarchies and its inequalities.

This is reflected in the terminology used. These days even the term
capitalism has gone out of fashion, replaced with the approved terms
“market system,” the “free market” or “free enterprise.” Yet, as Chomsky
noted, terms such as “free enterprise” are used “to designate a system
of autocratic governance of the economy in which neither the community
nor the workforce has any role (a system we would call
‘[fascist](Fascism.md "wikilink")’ if translated to the political
sphere).”[Language and
Politics]([Language_and_Politics_(Book).md "wikilink"), p. 175\] As such,it
seems hardly “value-free” to proclaim a system free when, in reality,
most people are distinctly not free for most of their waking hours and
whose choices outside production are influenced by the inequality of
wealth and power which that system of production create. This shift in
terminology reflects a political necessity. It effectively removes the
role of wealth (capital) from the economy. Instead of the owners and
manager of capital being in control or, at the very least, having
significant impact on social events, we have the impersonal activity of
“the markets” or “market forces.” That such a change in terminology is
the interest of those whose money accords them power and influence goes
without saying.

By focusing on the market,economics helps hide the real sources of power
in an economy and attention is drawn away from such a key questions of
how money (wealth) produces power and how it skews the “free market” in
its favour. All in all, as dissident economist [John Kenneth
Galbraith](John_Kenneth_Galbraith.md "wikilink") once put it, “\[w\]hat
economists believe and teach is rarely hostile to the institutions that
reflect the dominant economic power. Not to notice this takes effort,
although many succeed.” \[The Essential Galbraith, p. 180\] This becomes
obvious when we look at how the advice economics gives to working class
people. In theory, economics is based on individualism and
[competition](competition.md "wikilink") yet when it comes to what workers
should do, the “laws” of economics suddenly switch. The economist will
now deny that competition is a good idea and instead urge that the
workers co-operate (i.e. obey) their boss rather than compete (i.e.
struggle over the division of output and authority in the workplace).

They will argue that there is “harmony of interests” between worker and
boss, that it is in the self-interest of workers not to be selfish but
rather to do whatever the boss asks to further the bosses interests
(i.e. profits). That this perspective implicitly recognises the
dependent position of workers, goes without saying. So while the sale of
labour is portrayed as a market exchange between equals, it is in fact
an authority relation between servant and master. The conclusions of
economics is simply implicitly acknowledging that authoritarian
relationship by identifying with the authority figure in the
relationship and urging obedience to them. It simply suggests workers
make the best of it by refusing to be independent individuals who need
freedom to flourish (at least during working hours, outside they can
express their individuality by shopping). This should come as no
surprise, for, as Chomsky notes, economics is rooted in the notion that
“you only harm the poor by making them believe that they have rights
other than what they can win on the market, like a basic right to live,
because that kind of right interferes with the market, and with
efficiency, and with growth and so on — so ultimately people will just
be worse off if you try to recognise them.” \[Op. Cit., p. 251\]

Economics teaches that you must accept change without regard to whether
it is appropriate it not. It teaches that you must not struggle, you
must not fight. You must simply accept whatever change happens. Worse,
it teaches that resisting and fighting back are utterly
counter-productive. In other words, it teaches a servile mentality to
those subject to authority. For business, economics is ideal for getting
their employees to change their attitudes rather than collectively
change how their bosses treat them, structure their jobs or how they are
paid — or, of course, change the system. Of course, the economist who
says that they are conducting “value free” analysis are indifferent to
the kinds of relationships within society is being less than honest.
Capitalist economic theory is rooted in very specific assumptions and
concepts such as “economic man” and “perfect competition.” It claims to
be “value-free” yet its preferred terminology is riddled with value
connotations. For example, the behaviour of “economic man” (i.e., people
who are self-interested utility maximisation machines) is described as
“rational.”

By implication, then, the behaviour of real people is “irrational”
whenever they depart from this severely truncated account of human
nature and society. Our lives consist of much more than buying and
selling. We have goals and concerns which cannot be bought or sold in
markets. In other words, humanity and liberty transcend the limits of
property and, as a result, economics. This, unsurprisingly, affects
those who study the “science” as well: “Studying economics also seems to
make you a nastier person. Psychological studies have shown that
economics graduate students are more likely to ‘free ride’ — shirk
contributions to an experimental ‘[public
goods](Public_Goods.md "wikilink")’ account in the pursuit of higher
private returns — than the general public. Economists also are less
generous that other academics in charitable giving. Undergraduate
economics majors are more likely to defect in the classic prisoner’s
dilemma game that are other majors.

And on other tests, [students](Student.md "wikilink") grow less honest —
expressing less of a tendency, for example, to return found money —
after studying economics, but not studying a control subject like
astronomy. “This is no surprise, really. Mainstream economics is built
entirely on a notion of self-interested individuals, rational
self-maximisers who can order their wants and spend accordingly. There’s
little room for sentiment, uncertainty, selflessness, and social
institutions. Whether this is an accurate picture of the average human
is open to question, but there’s no question that capitalism as a system
and economics as a discipline both reward people who conform to the
model.” [\[Doug Henwood]([Doug_Henwood.md "wikilink"), [Wall
Street](Wall_Street_(Book).md "wikilink"), p, 143\] So is economics “value
free”? Far from it. Given its social role, it would be surprising that
it were. That it tends to produce policy recommendations that benefit
the capitalist class is not an accident. It is rooted in the fibre of
the “science” as it reflects the assumptions of capitalist society and
its class structure. Not only does it take the power and class
structures of capitalism for granted, it also makes them the ideal for
any and every economy.

Given this, it should come as no surprise that economists will tend to
support policies which will make the real world conform more closely to
the standard (usually neoclassical) economic model. Thus the models of
economics become more than a set of abstract assumptions, used simply as
a tool in theoretical analysis of the casual relations of facts. Rather
they become political goals, an ideal towards which reality should be
forced to travel. This means that economics has a dual character. On the
one hand, it attempts to prove that certain things (for example, that
free market capitalism produces an optimum allocation of resources or
that, given free competition, price formation will ensure that each
person’s income corresponds to their productive contribution). On the
other, economists stress that economic “science” has nothing to do with
the question of the justice of existing institutions, class structures
or the current economic system. And some people seem surprised that this
results in policy recommendations which consistently and systematically
favour the ruling class.

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink") [Category:An
Anarchist FAQ](Category:An_Anarchist_FAQ.md "wikilink")