---
title: Cajamarca Anti-Mine Movement
permalink: /Cajamarca_Anti-Mine_Movement/
---

The **Cajamarca Anti-Mine Movement** was an effort in
[2011](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_South_America.md "wikilink")
and [2012](Timeline_of_Environmentalism.md "wikilink") in
[Peru](Peru.md "wikilink") to permanently close the Conga mine, a gold
mine, which would've been the second largest gold mine in the world and
the largest piece of foreign investment.

## Background

In February 2010, [U.S.](United_States_of_America.md "wikilink")-based
Newmont Mining Company proposed a joint venture with the Peruvian
company Mina Buenaventura to build the Conga mine, a new gold mine, in
the Cajamarca region of Peru. Newmont proposed investing \$4.8 billion
in the project, the largest investment in Peru’s history, and the mine
would become the second largest gold mine in the world. Newmont hoped to
begin production in either 2014 or 2015, upon getting permission from
the Peruvian government. Newmont submitted an environmental impact study
for the Conga mine, which the Peruvian government approved.

However, Peruvian locals in Cajamarca opposed the building of the Conga
mine, concerned that the project would affect the fragile mountain
wetlands in Cajamarca that include numerous lakes, rivers, and marshes
that supply the region locals’ drinking [water](water.md "wikilink").
Locals were not convinced by Newmont’s additional proposal to build
artificial lakes to replace the four main high altitude lakes that would
be affected by the mine. Locals in Cajamarca mistrusted the new project
from the start, since Cajamarca is one of Peru’s most heavily mined
regions and locals have experienced a history of troubled relations with
mining companies in the region – including Newmont, which proposed the
Yanacocha gold mine, Latin America’s largest gold mine, outside
Cajamarca in 1993. The president of Peru, Ollanta Humala, publicly
supported the Cajamarca locals’ opposition to the Conga mine as a
presidential candidate and had stated, “the lagoons of Cajamarca are not
for sale, because you can’t drink gold, and you don’t eat gold”.
However, after being sworn into office on 28 July 2011, Humala later
changed his stance and supported the building of the Conga mine, with
the justification that Peru needs the project due to the profits and
jobs it would generate. Mining makes up a substantial portion of the
Peruvian economy, as mining accounts for about 60% of Peru’s export
earnings.

## Events

On the 24th of November 2011, an estimated 10,000 residents of Cajamarca
(with a total population of about 200,000)
[marched](Protest_March.md "wikilink") through the city to protest the
building of the Conga. Cajamarca state governor Gregorio Santos helped
lead protest efforts. During the march, protesters clashed with riot
[police](police.md "wikilink") who tear-gassed and fired upon protesters,
resulting in reportedly 17 injuries. Protesters also used boulders to
blockade the main roads in the region. Some Cajamarca-area schools and
businesses closed in protest. In the nearby region of Yanacocha,
protesters also reportedly entered the Newmont-owned mine site there and
destroyed a warehouse. Six days later, consruction was canceled, and the
protested lasted another 5 days leading to a state of emergency declared
by president Humala. Police continued to use tear gas and rubber bullets
on protesters.

More protest marches occurred, and on the 9th of April, Protesters used
rocks and tree trunks to barricade main roads through the area, blocking
traffic for several hours. The construction of the mine resumes in late
June 2012 and in response 2,000 protesters plan to storm city offices
near the construction site and set fire to vehicles and attack
government buildings, police kill several protesters and detain and beat
several others. Several government ministers resign and construction is
canceled on the 28th of August, 2012.

## Results

The campaign led to the mine constructions being canceled.

## See Also

- [Puno Anti-Mine Movement](Puno_Anti-Mine_Movement.md "wikilink")

[Category:2011](Category:2011.md "wikilink")
[Category:2012](Category:2012.md "wikilink")
[Category:2010s](Category:2010s.md "wikilink") [Category:21st
Century](Category:21st_Century.md "wikilink") [Category:Libertarian
Socialist Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink")
[Category:Peru](Category:Peru.md "wikilink") [Category:South
America](Category:South_America.md "wikilink")
[Category:Mining](Category:Mining.md "wikilink")