---
title: Catal Huyuk
permalink: /Catal_Huyuk/
---

**Catal Huyuk** or **Çatalhöyük** was an early city that expressed
[statelessness](List_of_Libertarian_Socialist_Societies "wikilink"),
[communism](Anarcho-Communism "wikilink"), [gender
equality](Gender_Equality "wikilink") and environmental
[sustainability](sustainability "wikilink") between [7500BCE to
5700BCE](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism "wikilink").

## Crime

Paintings do not depict fighting or crime, and there is no evidence in
skeletons of violence.[^1][^2]

## Economy

There were no signs of a [market economy](Market_Economy "wikilink") or
[central planning](Centrally_Planned_Economy "wikilink"), whilst equal
sized houses and burial goods being the same size and quality all signs
of an [anarcho-communist](Anarcho-Communism "wikilink") society. There
was also a wide diversity of material goods, suggesting and
individualistic culture.[^3][^4]

Researchers estimate that half of people's labor time focused on meeting
people's basic needs, and the other half focused on cultural production
such as organizing feasts, dances, rituals, education, and the painting
of murals.Average average life expectancy, of 32 years, surpassed that
of other populations for nearly 10,000 years, until around 1750 with the
rise of modern medicine.[^5]

Catal Huyuk was responsible for numerous key innovations of modern
civilization, notably the ability to [mine](Mining "wikilink"), smelt
and use metal and the organisational concept of the
[city](city "wikilink").[^6]

## Culture

There is a great degree of evidence that this society had gender
equality. Men and women ate similar food, lived similar lives and worked
in similar ways. Of 41 excavated sculptures of deities, 33 were of
goddesses and only 8 depicted masculine gods.[^7][^8]

## Collapse

There is no clear evidence explaining why people left, as there is no
signs of violence, war or disease. The only evidence is that a river
stopped flowing through the region.[^9]

## See Also

- [Cayonu Tepesi](Cayonu_Tepesi "wikilink")

## References

<references />

[Category:Societies](Category:Societies "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Societies](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Societies "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialism](Category:Libertarian_Socialism "wikilink")
[Category:Anarchism](Category:Anarchism "wikilink")
[Category:Anarcho-Communism](Category:Anarcho-Communism "wikilink")
[Category:Asia](Category:Asia "wikilink") [Category:Western
Asia](Category:Western_Asia "wikilink")
[Category:Turkey](Category:Turkey "wikilink") [Category:Past Libertarian
Socialist
Societies](Category:Past_Libertarian_Socialist_Societies "wikilink")
[Category:Before Common Era](Category:Before_Common_Era "wikilink")

[^1]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") -
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%87atalh%C3%B6y%C3%BCk>

[^2]: <http://www.urkommunismus.de/catalhueyuek_en.html>

[^3]:

[^4]: [Murray Bookchin](Murray_Bookchin "wikilink") (1992) [The Rise of
    Urbanization and the Decline of
    Citizenship](The_Rise_of_Urbanization_and_the_Decline_of_Citizenship "wikilink")

[^5]:

[^6]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") -
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_historic_inventions#Neolithic>

[^7]: [www.hurriyetdailynews.com/Default.aspx?PageID=238&NID=72411&NewsCatID=375](www.hurriyetdailynews.com/Default.aspx?PageID=238&NID=72411&NewsCatID=375 "wikilink")

[^8]: [Erich Fromm](Erich_Fromm "wikilink") (1973) *[The Anatomy of
    Human
    Destructiveness](The_Anatomy_of_Human_Destructiveness "wikilink")*

[^9]: