---
title: Chilean Military Coup (1973)
permalink: /Chilean_Military_Coup_(1973)/
---

*Not to be confused with [9/11 in the
US](9/11_Attacks_(2001) "wikilink")*

The **Chilean Military Coup of 1973** was an overthrowing of the
democratic socialist government (led by [Salvador
Allende](Salvador_Allende "wikilink")) by the
[Chilean](Chile "wikilink") army (led by [Augusto
Pinochet](Augusto_Pinochet "wikilink")) with extensive support from the
[CIA](CIA "wikilink") (US), [ASIO](ASIO "wikilink")
([Australia](Australia "wikilink")), the [UK](United_Kingdom "wikilink")
and [Brazil](Brazil "wikilink") on the [11th of September,
1973](Timeline_of_US_Imperialism "wikilink"). The coup led to the
creation of the brutal [Pinochet
Dictatorship](Pinochet_Dictatorship "wikilink") and an end to the most
stable and democratic government in South America.

## Background

After [World War I](World_War_I "wikilink"), the [British
Empire](British_Empire "wikilink") was in decline, and soon the US
pushed out British companies out of Chile and replaced them with US ones
who controlled much of the countries GDP, preventing it from developing
as a nation as wealth was funneled to wealthy americans. [Trade
unionists](Trade_Union "wikilink") became active around the country,
pushing for increased wages, [social
democracy](Social_Democracy "wikilink"), and, in extreme cases,
[workers' control](Workers'_Self-Management "wikilink") or a communist
revolution.

During the 1950s and 1960s, the US government (alongside large
corporations and banks) funded centrist and right-wing opposition
candidates in Chilean elections as well as anti-communist media outlets
and groups. The US successfuly persuaded the Chilean government to lower
tariffs in order to reduce inflation, leading to the Chilean market to
be overwhelmed by American products. Thus, the idea of electing a
leftist candidate became popular, and [Salvador
Allende](Salvador_Allende "wikilink") (a communist) became more popular
with each election.

In this environment of economic crisis, US interference and political
corruption, people became increasingly radicalised towards communism and
fascism. Various groups attacked each-other, assasinations occured and
strikes broke out across the country in the late 1960s and early
1970s.[^1] Salvador Allende won the election in 1970, and proposed to
nationalise US-owned copper mines, pursue foreign relations with
[Cuba](Cuba "wikilink") and the [USSR](USSR "wikilink") and introduce
measures of workers' control, angering US business interests.

## Preparations

The US (with the assistance of Brazil, Australia and the UK) began to
plan the coup. The US placed an embargo on Chile, US banks in the
country froze assets, the US paid trade unions to strike, opposition
leaders were paid to speak against him and media outlets ran furious
anti-Allende campaigns. This led to a lot of division and anger in the
country, but Allende remained in power. Leading to Project Fubelt, where
the CIA identified disgruntled military officers and promised to assist
in a coup, and threatened to cut off military aid if a coup did not
occur.[^2]

## Coup

At 7am on the 11th of September (chosen to match the coup 49 years
earlier, on the 12th of September, 1924) the military defected from the
government, the Navy stationing ships and marine infantry across the
coast to prevent Allende's escape or reinforcements from the
[USSR](USSR "wikilink"). The army ordered all radio and TV stations to
close down, and the air force bombed the ones that refused. Military
leaders that remained loyal to the government had their telephone
services cut and their cars sabotaged to prevent their movement and
communication, any who made it near the presidential residence were
arrested by the soldiers. In just 2 hours, the military took control of
the whole country, except the city centre of Santiago and University of
Chile (where fierce leftist student militias fought soldiers).

Allende's advisors from Cuba and the Socialist Party advised that he
escape the presidential residency, to the outskirts of Santiago, where
he could organise a revolution against the army, but he refused, citing
his [nonviolent principles](Pacifism "wikilink"). He refused all offers
to negotiate with the military, citing his duty to the Chilean people.
The military began bombing the residence with fighter jets and a
helicopter gunship before tanks broke the gate and soldiers stormed the
residence. A 4-hour long firefight between Allende's guards and the
Chilean soldiers occurred, and Allende shot himself in the head with a
revolver to escape capture.[^3]

## Results

The coup was a resounding success, the army quickly took control of the
streets, defeating the few leftist popular militias based out of the
University of Chile with street-by-street gunfights and battles and the
use of the air force on its own population. All democratic institutions
in Chile were dissolved and the [army took complete control of
society](Pinochet_Dictatorship "wikilink"), converting former offices of
leftist groups and the National Stadium into concentration camps where
the execution of political dissidents began.[^4]

## Libertarian Socialist Analysis

The Chilean Military Coup of 1973 unfortunately exposes some of the
weaknesses inherent to the politics of [social
democracy](Social_Democracy "wikilink") and [centralised/authoritarian
socialism](Authoritarian_Socialism "wikilink") (unfortunate as we'd wish
these programs had worked historically, as then we'd be living in a much
more just and fairer world). If you organise any organisation, even a
revolutionary one, from the top-down, it's relatively easily for
counter-revolutionaries to identify the 'head' of said organisation and
destroy it. People below them have not been trained in (or may not even
be aware of) the principles of direct democracy, and are thus completely
dependent on taking orders from above. If the 'above' is killed, then it
just results in confusion, power plays, paranoia, corruption and
infighting, which have destroyed so many efforts to build a socialist
society before and is one of the main criticisms of other forms of
socialism and [representative
democracy](Representative_Democracy "wikilink") made by [libertarian
socialists](Libertarian_Socialism "wikilink").[^5]

## See Also

- [Australian Coup
  (1975)](Australian_Constitutional_Crisis_(1975) "wikilink")

## References

<references />

[Category:Coups](Category:Coups "wikilink") [Category:20th
Century](Category:20th_Century "wikilink")
[Category:Chile](Category:Chile "wikilink") [Category:South
America](Category:South_America "wikilink")
[Category:1970s](Category:1970s "wikilink")
[Category:1973](Category:1973 "wikilink") [Category:Libertarian
Socialist Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:CIA](Category:CIA "wikilink")
[Category:ASIO](Category:ASIO "wikilink")

[^1]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") -
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Armed_resistance_in_Chile_(1973%E2%80%931990)#Pre-dictatorship_violence>

[^2]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") -
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_intervention_in_Chile#Allende_presidency>

[^3]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") -
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1973_Chilean_coup_d%27%C3%A9tat#Military_action>

[^4]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") -
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Military_dictatorship_of_Chile_(1973%E2%80%931990)>

[^5]: [Chris Pallis](Chris_Pallis "wikilink") (1961) - [Revolutionary
    Organization](Revolutionary_Organization_(Pamphlet) "wikilink")