---
title: Chinese Honda Strike (2010)
permalink: /Chinese_Honda_Strike_(2010)/
---

The **Chinese Honda Strike of 2010** refers to [three
strikes](List_of_Strikes.md "wikilink") in [China](China.md "wikilink") that
happened in [May and June of
2010by](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Eastern_Asia.md "wikilink")
car factory workers. It was part of a [broader global wave of
unrest](Revolutions_of_2008_-_2014.md "wikilink"), but [especially in
China](Chinese_Protest_Wave_(2007_-_2014).md "wikilink").

## Background

In 2009, China became the world's fastest growing automobile market. One
corporation that contributed to the market's remarkable growth was Honda
Motor Corporation. Honda, a [Japanese](Japan.md "wikilink") corporation
that first entered China in 1999, had four car plants in China. In 2010,
sweeping labor unrest spread throughout China and workers at Honda's
four car plants seized the opportunity to seek out higher pay and better
working conditions.

## Events

On the 17th of May, 1,900 workers from a transmission factory in Foshan,
China went on strike. Every single worker at the factory joined the
strike, demanding higher wages and better working conditions. Though the
Chinese government had substantially raised the minimal wages for
factory workers to \$130 dollars per month, the workers felt that their
wages were not fair. On average, Honda factory workers earned between
\$150 and \$220 dollars per month, but the factory workers at Foshan
wanted wages equal to those of assembly plant workers, who earned
between \$300 and \$370 dollars per month. Workers also complained of
having to wake up at unreasonable times to attend work and having to
work in hot facilities with poor air-conditioning. Ten days into the
strike Honda halted production at all four car plants due to a shortage
of transmissions. The result was a reduction in productivity of about
300 vehicles per day. Consequently, on the 31st of May, Honda announced
its decision to increase the minimum monthly salaries at that site to
\$280 dollars per month. The majority of the workers welcomed the 24%
raise in wages, but forty workers remained on strike seeking additional
raises and a physical confrontation allegedly occurred between some of
the strikers and union officials sent in by the government. Production
resumed on 2nd of June.

Workers once again challenged Honda on the 9th of June, when 100 workers
at a factory at Zhongshan walked out on strike. The factory, which
specialized in the production of keys, locks, and other related parts,
stopped production during the early morning. Two days later, reports
suggest that 500 workers marched, picketed, and blocked roads outside of
the factory before riot police arrived to disperse the crowd. Some of
the workers had claimed that they wanted a legitimate union to represent
them because the only unions allowed by the communist government were
those formed by the communist government. On 14th of June, the Zhongshan
strike promptly ended as replacement workers began their first days of
work. Some 100 workers held a rally outside the site as new workers
entered. Honda agreed to raise the salaries at the site by 11% to \$152
dollars per month.

Honda workers orchestrated a final strike at a factory that specialized
in the production of gear shift levers. The strike began on 12th of July
and lasted until the 22nd of July. During the strike, overall production
continued at a regular rate. Once again, Honda agreed to raise wages of
the workers at the site, but details of the increase were not disclosed
to the media. The conclusion of the strike officially marked the end of
the workers' fairly successful campaign against Honda for improved
wages. Each striking site received some variation of a wage increase,
but the magnitudes of the wage increase varied from site to site.

## Results

The strikes were moderately successful. All striking sites were able to
secure some variation of a raise in wages. There were workers, however,
that were not satisfied with the concessions from Honda and wanted to
continue protesting.

## References

[Global Nonviolent Action
Database](Global_Nonviolent_Action_Database.md "wikilink") - [Chinese
autoworkers strike to demand higher wages from Honda,
2010](https://nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu/content/chinese-autoworkers-strike-demand-higher-wages-honda-2010)

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink")
[Category:Strikes](Category:Strikes.md "wikilink")
[Category:China](Category:China.md "wikilink")
[Category:Asia](Category:Asia.md "wikilink") [Category:Eastern
Asia](Category:Eastern_Asia.md "wikilink")
[Category:2010](Category:2010.md "wikilink")
[Category:2010s](Category:2010s.md "wikilink") [Category:21st
Century](Category:21st_Century.md "wikilink")