---
title: Chu Cha-pei
permalink: /Chu_Cha-pei/
---

**Chu Cha-pei** was an [anarchist](Anarchism.md "wikilink") [guerilla
leader and soldier](List_of_Libertarian_Socialists.md "wikilink"), active
in the [Yunnan Resistance](Yunnan_Resistance_(1950s).md "wikilink"). The
only known account of him comes from an interview with [H.L.
Wei](H.L._Wei.md "wikilink") in 1975, who said he was "a sort of
[Chinese](China.md "wikilink") [Makhno](Nestor_Makhno.md "wikilink"), from the
Yunnan province in the south, near Burma and Indo-China, the son of a
soldier and attended Whampoa Military Academy. He read [Pa
Chin's](Ba_Jin.md "wikilink") translations of anarchist classics and an
ardent anarchists. He later met Pa Chin and visited me and my wife in
Nanjing in 1936. He told us that one day he would welcome us to an
anarchist utopia in the south. Chu Cha-pei actually knew about Makhno
from Bao Puo, who wrote about him in the paper *Kuo Feng* (National
Folkways) after returning to China from Moscow in 1923. Chu was tall,
strong, intelligent. Like Pa Chin, he was a man of few words. He fought
in turn against the Japanese, the Nationalists, and the Communists, just
as Makhno had fought against the Austro-German occupiers, the Whites and
Nationalists, and the Communists. Again like Makhno, his base of
activity was in the mountains of his native district in the south, which
he continued to launch attacks against the Communist authorities
throughout the 1950s. He is probably still there, still alive, hiding in
the mountains of Yunnan, though his precise whereabouts are
unknown."[^1]

## References

<references />

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialism](Category:Libertarian_Socialism.md "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialists](Category:Libertarian_Socialists.md "wikilink")
[Category:Anarchists](Category:Anarchists.md "wikilink")
[Category:Anarchism](Category:Anarchism.md "wikilink")
[Category:China](Category:China.md "wikilink") [Category:Eastern
Asia](Category:Eastern_Asia.md "wikilink")
[Category:Asia](Category:Asia.md "wikilink")

[^1]: [Paul Avrich](Paul_Avrich.md "wikilink") - [Anarchist Voices: An Oral
    History of Anarchism in
    America](Anarchist_Voices:_An_Oral_History_of_Anarchism_in_America.md "wikilink"),
    page 216