---
title: CIA
permalink: /CIA/
---

The **Central Intelligence Agency** is a
[US](United_States_of_America.md "wikilink") agency official tasked with
"gathering, processing, and analyzing national security information from
around the world". In reality, the CIA acts as a wing of [US
Imperialism](Timeline_of_US_Imperialism.md "wikilink"), aiming to make the
world safe for US business interests by overthrowing governments that do
not subordinate themselves to US business.

## Timeline of Known Actions

### 1940s

1943 - Italy - spy network formed in Italy that would remain for
decades.

1945 - Operation Paperclip (secretly placing Nazi intelligence agents,
scientists and others into US intelligence and military).

1947 - Greece - CIA uses funds and information for support extreme
right-wing leaders.

1948 - Covert action wing created, responsible for "propaganda, economic
warfare, preventive direct action, including sabotage, anti-sabotage,
demolition and evacuation procedures; subversion against hostile states,
including assistance to underground resistance groups, and support of
indigenous anti-communist elements in threatened countries of the free
world."

1948 - CIA throws Italian election to favor US puppet.

1949 - Syria - CIA backs right-wing military coup to insure blocked
ARMACO pipeline can run through Syria.

Late 1940's - Operation Mockingbird (recruitment of journalists,
editors, and others to spy and disseminate CIA approved info to US and
worldwide media. At it's stated height before going completely
underground Mockingbird had thousands of infiltrator in every media in
the US. After the project was revealed by Congress in the 1970's the CIA
said it was stopping, but instead merely made the project completely
clandestine).

1950 - Burma (Myanmar) - After the Chinese Revolution, Kuomintang
generals moved into northern Burma and became powerful drug lords, with
Thai military protection, financing from Taiwan and air transport and
logistical support from the CIA. Burma's opium production grew from 18
tons in 1958 to 600 tons in 1970. The CIA maintained these forces as a
bulwark against communist China but they transformed the "golden
triangle" into the world's largest opium producer. Most of the opium was
shipped by mule trains into Thailand where other CIA allies shipped it
to heroin labs in Hong Kong and Malaysia. The trade shifted around 1970
as CIA partner General Vang Pao set up new labs in Laos to provide
heroin to GIs in Vietnam. CIA whistle-blowers have stated that during
the Vietnam War the CIA shipped heroin back to the US in the bodybags of
US servicemen.

1953 - Iran - the CIA overthrows the first democratically elected
government in the Middle East because the Prime Minister wanted to
nationalize British Oil in Iran. He was replaced by the CIA with the
brutal Shah, and his secret police the SAVAK.

1953 - Operation MK-ULTRA - Using North Korea's brainwashing program as
a basis, the CIA began perfecting mind control. As part of the
experiment who communities in the US and Canada we doused with LSD and
other drugs. Reserch included propaganda, brainwashing, public
relations, advertising, hypnosis, and other forms of suggestion. It has
been claimed that MK-ULTRA was used to create compliant patsies to take
the blame for CIA assassinations.

1954 - Guatemala - CIA overthrows the democratically elected government
of Jacob Arbenz in a military coup for wanting to nationalize the United
Fruit Company, which the CIA director Dulles was a stock holder. The
string of right-wing dictators would create the blood-thirsty policies
that would murder over 100,000 Guatemalans.

1954-1958 - North Vietnam - The CIA spends four years attempting to
overthrow the communist government in N. Vietnam at the same time it
tries to legitimize the ruthless CIA puppet in stalled in S. Vietnam,
Diem. The failure on both front would eventually lead directly to the
Vietnam War.

1955-1957 - Tibet - According to the 14th Dalai Lama, the CIA supported
the Tibetan independence movement "not because they (the CIA) cared
about Tibetan independence, but as part of their worldwide efforts to
destabilize all communist governments".

1956 - Hungary - The CIA uses Radio Free Europe to incite Hungary to
revolt against the Soviets. The CIA claims that America will help the
revolt, but when it is finally launched no US help comes. The result of
the CIA interference is a massive Soviet invasion of Hungary, 7000
Soviet deaths and 30,000 dead Hungarians.

1957-1973 - Laos - Over this period the CIA carries out approx. one coup
a year to try to nullify Laos' democratic elections. The reason is that
a leftist group, Pathet Loa, has enough popular support to be a faction
in any government. The US even creates a secret army of Asian
mercenaries to plague the country, to no avail. After numerous defeats
the US starts an unprecedented bombing campaign of Laos, dropping more
bombs on this one tiny country than all the US bombs dropped in WWII.
One Quarter of all Laotians will eventually become refugees.

1959 - Haiti - The CIA puts their puppet "Papa Doc" Duvalier in place as
dictator of Haiti. His private police terrorize the populace with
machetes, ultimately killing over 100,000.

1961 - Cuba, Bay of Pigs (Operation Mongoose) - The CIA sends 1500 Cuban
exiles to invade Castro's Cuba. Long before the invasion the CIA
discovers that the Soviets are aware of the planned attack and have
alerted Cuba. The CIA continues with the plan anyway without informing
President Kennedy so that it will negatively affect his administration.
As a result Kennedy fires CIA director Allen Dulles, who continues
running the CIA's covert arm from the sidelines. Over the decades the
CIA would try to assassinate Castro numerous times, succeed in
assassinating other government officials, engage in acts of terrorism
against the Cuban people (as recently as 1997 the CIA bombed tourists in
Cuba), and a biological attack with Swine Flu that killed half-a-million
pigs.

1961 - Dominican Republic - The CIA assassinates Rafael Trujillo, the
murderous dictator the US has supported since the 1930's. The reason he
was assassinated was that his business interests had grown so large that
he was now competing with US business interests.

1961 - Ecuador - The CIA forces the democratically elected President
Jose Velasco to resign. When the Vice President replaces him, the CIA
fills the now-vacant VP spot with its own man.

1961 - Congo (Zaire) - The CIA assassinates the democratically elected
Patrice Lumumba. However Lumumba is so popular the CIA is unsuccessful
installing their puppet to replace him. The tussle results in four years
of turmoil in the country.

1963 - Dominican Republic - The CIA overthrows the democratically
elected Juan Bosch in a military coup. The CIA installs a repressive,
right-wing junta.

1963 - Ecuador - The CIA overthrows the democratically elected President
Arosemana in a military coup. The military junta the CIA puts in place
cancels the 1964 elections, and begins abusing human rights.

1964 - Brazil - The CIA overthrows the democratically elected Joao
Goulart. The military junta that the CIA replaces him with over the next
two decade will be the most bloodthirsty in history. The CIA then trains
the first death squad in Latin America who hunt down, torture and murder
political opponents in terror campaigns claiming they are Communists.

1965 - Indonesia - The CIA overthrows the democratically elected
Sukarno, an attempt that has been ongoing since 1957. The military junta
put in his place led by General Suharto will massacre between 500,000
and 1 million civilians, the name of many of which are supplied by the
CIA.

1965 - Dominican Republic - A popular revolt attempts to re-install
democratically elected Juan Bosch. It is crushed by the CIA landing US
Marines to uphold the military regime by force.

1965 - Greece - When the Prime Minister Popandreous doesn't uphold
American interests in Greece strongly enough, the CIA orders the Greek
King to remove him, which he does.

1965 - Congo (Zaire) - CIA-backed military coup installs Mobutu Sese
Seko as dictator. The hated and repressive Mobutu will plunder his
desperately poor country of billions.

1966 - Ghana - The CIA staged a coup and overthrew the democratically
elected President Kwame Nkrumah. Nkrumah was Socialist, pan-African, and
anti-imperialist. 40 CIA officers operated out of the US embassy
distributing largess to Nkrumah's adversaries.

1966 - The Ramparts Affair - Radical Ramparts magazine publishes a
series of articles showing that the CIA has paid the University of
Michigan \$25 million to hire "professors" to train South Vietnamese
students in covert police methods. MIT and other universities have
received similar payments. Ramparts also reveals that the National
Student's Association is a CIA front, recruiting students through
blackmail and bribery, including draft deferments.

1967 - Greece - A CIA-backed military coup overthrows the Greek
government two days before the elections, which favored the CIA-ousted
former Prime Minister. During the next six years the CIA-backed "Reign
of the Colonels" will use wide-spread torture and murder to negate
political opponents. Then the Greek Ambassador objects to President
Johnson about the US plans for Cyprus, Johnson tells him, "Fuck your
parliament and your constitution."

1967 - Operation Phoenix - The CIA helps South Vietnamese agents
identify and murder alleged Viet Cong leaders. According to a 1971
congressional report the operation killed over 20,000.

1968 - Operation CHAOS - The CIA had been illegally spying on American
citizens since 1959, but with Operation CHAOS President Johnson
dramatically boosts the effort. CIA agents go undercover as student
radicals to spy on and disrupt campus organizations protesting the
Vietnam War. They claim they are looking for Russian instigators, which
are never found. 7000 individuals and 1000 organizations are spied upon.

1968 - Bolivia - A CIA-organized military operation captures legendary
guerilla Che Guevara. The CIA wants him alive for interrogation, but
before they can collect him the Bolivian government executed him to
prevent worldwide calls for clemency.

1969 - Uruguay - The CIA send expert torturer Dan Mitrione to teach the
right wing forces to use torture as a widespread, routine practice as
death squads. His motto: "The precise pain, in the precise place, in the
precise amount, for the desired effect."

1970 - Cambodia - The CIA overthrows popular Prince Sahounek, who has
kept Cambodia out of the Vietnam War. He is replaced by CIA-puppet Lon
Nol, who immediately throws Cambodia into the war. The widespread
dissent and hatred of Nol and his actions will bring the Khmer Rouge to
power five years later.

1971 - Bolivia - The CIA overthrows democratically elected President
Juan Torres. CIA placed dictator Hugo Banzer will have over 2000
political opponents arrested, tortured, raped and executed.

1971 - Haiti - CIA puppet "Papa Doc" Duvalier dies, leaving his son
"Baby Doc" Duvalier as dictator of Haiti. His son continues his bloody
CIA backed reign.

1972 - The Case-Zablocki Act - Congress passes an act requiring
congressional review of executive agreements. This is intended to make
the CIA more accountable, but in reality only drives CIA actions more
deeply covert.

1972 - Cambodia - As a result of the public outcry from publication of
the Pentagon Papers congress votes to cut off CIA funds for its secret
war in Cambodia.

1972 - Watergate Break-in - the CIA sets up Nixon for impeachment by
getting him to wiretap the Democratic offices at the Watergate
Hotel. These activities are funded and organized by the CIA-front Mullen
Company.

1973 - The CIA overthrows and assassinated the democratically elected
President Salvador Allende because he had nationalized American-owned
firms in Chile. ITT offered the CIA \$1 million to stage a coup. The CIA
replaced Allende with General Augusto Pinochet who over the next 20
years will torture over 30,000, forcibly intern over 80,000, and murder
over 10,000.

1973 - Watergate scandal - The Washington Post breaks the Watergate
scandal, which makes almost no mention of the CIA or its obvious
fingerprints all over the scandal. Woodward was a Naval Intelligence
briefer to the White House and had many connections to the intelligence
community, as their informant Deep Throat likely was.

1973 - Nixon fires CIA Director Richard Helms and appoints William Colby
who is more open to reforming the CIA.

1974 - Operation CHAOS exposed - Seymour Hersh publishes detail about
Operation CHAOS domestic surveillance and infiltration.

1975 - Australia - The CIA topples the democratically elected,
left-leaning government of Prime Minister Edward Whitlam. Long-time CIA
collaborator Governor-General John Kerr, at the behest of the CIA,
exercises his largely ceremonial right to dissolve the Whitlam
government. The use of this never-before-used law stuns the nation.

1975 - Angola - Eager to demonstrate the US military resolve after its
defeat in Vietnam, Henry Kissinger launches a CIA-backed war in
Angola. Opposite to Kissinger's assertions, Angola has little strategic
importance or threat of Communism; it is selected simply because it will
be an easy target.The CIA back the ruthless leader of UNITAS, Jonas
Savimbi. This polarizes Angolan politics and drives Savimbi's opponents
into the arms of Cuba and the Soviet Union. In 1976 Congress cut off
funds, but the CIA is able to run the war off books until 1984, when the
Reagan-era congress legally funds it again. The entirely pointless war
kills over 300,000 Angolans.

1975 - Congress investigate CIA - Public outrage over Watergate compels
congress to hold hearings on CIA crimes. Senator Frank Church head the
Senate investigation ("The Church Committee") and Otis Pike heads the
House investigation ("The Pike Committee"). CIA head William Colby
initially answers questions, but the Ford administration fires him and
brings in George H.W. Bush to stall. Bush's first action is to instruct
the Ford administration to completely refuse to cooperate any more,
which they do. The investigations lead to a number of reforms intended
to increase CIA accountability, but in fact merely drive CIA actions
further into the cover world, with the increased use of proxies and
wholly-owned NGOs (like USAID and NED). 10 years later the Iran/Contra
scandal would prove that no reforms had actually taken place. Despite
Frank Chruch and Otis Pike both having a 98% incumbency reelection rate,
massive funding by the CIA of their opponents meant that both lost their
seats in the next election. Bella Abzug, a leftist from the House who
was strongly involved in CIA questioning in the Pike Committee was the
next year redistricted out of her seat.

1975 - The Rockefeller Commission - In an attempt at damage control over
the public Church and Pike Committees, President Ford creates the
Rockefeller Commission to whitewash CIA history and wrong-doing, and to
propose toothless reforms. The commission's namesake, Vice President
Nelson Rockefeller, is himself a major CIA figure Five of the
commission's eight members are also members of the CIA-run Council on
Foreign Relations.

1975 - Operation Condor - The CIA set up a joint operation for six
despotic right-wing regimes in South America to share info on their
political opponents. The six regimes were Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil,
Chile, Paraguay and Uruguay. It is estimated that, as a result of
Operation Condor in excess of 13,000 people were killed.

1978 - Afghanistan - In April of 1978 the socialist People's Democratic
Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) with help from the Afghan National Army
staged a coup and took power, establishing the Democratic Republic of
Afghanistan. The CIA immediately began setting up an insurgency among
the mostly traditional rural population to whom the PDPA's modernization
efforts were wildly unpopular. The result was the Mujahideen, taking
their name from the Afghan group who fought British control in the
mid-1800's. The deteriorating state of Afghanistan forced Soviet leader
Brezhnev to send Soviet troops, who staged a coup and took over
Afghanistan. The CIA then began massively arming and aiding the
Mujahideen to counter the Soviets. The end result was the dissolution of
the Soviet Union and the creation of what would become Al Qaeda and the
Taliban.

1979 - Iran - Due to the CIA's heavy involvement in setting up the
insurgency to the Afghan government's 1978 election (the insurgency
eventually forcing the Soviets to invade Afghanistan) the CIA completely
missed all warning of the coup in Iran that would oust long-time CIA
puppet ruler the Shah. The Shah's despotism and the violent actions of
the CIA-backed secret police SAVAK, resulted in the rise of the Muslim
fundamentalists to power.

1979 - El Salvador - An idealistic group of young officers, repulsed by
massacres of the poor, overthrow the right-wing government. The CIA then
compels the inexperienced officers to include CIA-compliant members of
the old guard in key government positions. These individuals soon have
the government back to killing poor civilian protesters.

1979 - Nicaragua - After a long siege of the country, the right-wing
CIA-puppet dictator, Anastasios Samoza II, flees the country and the
Marxist Sandinistas take over. The CIA rounded up the members of the
Somoza regime's National Guard and formed the Contras death
squads. Congress initially approved funding for the Contras until it was
revealed that Reagan had "exaggerated" Soviet influence in Nicaragua
(i.e. he lied) so in 1985 congress cut al funding. The CIA had already
been covertly funding the Contras using the illegal Iran/Contra scheme.
Over the years the Contras death squads were responsible for over 1300
known violation of human rights, including targeting hospitals and aid
workers, torture, rape, executing civilians and children to incite
terror, all at the behest and training of the CIA. The death toll from
the Contras era has been estimated at 25,000.

1980 - El Salvador - The Archbishop of El Salvador, Oscar Romero, begs
President Carter "Christian to Christian" to stop aiding his country's
military slaughter of civilians. Carter refuses. Shortly afterwards,
right-wing leader Roberto D'Aubuisson has Romero shot through the heart
while saying mass. The country soon dissolves into civil war, with
the CIA training and funding death squads to roam the countryside,
instilling terror and committing atrocities. By 1992 some 63,000
Salvadoreans will have been killed.

1981 - Iran/Contra begins - Prior to the 1980 presidential election CIA
representative of Reagan/Bush had approached the Iranian Revolution to
make an arrangement: that in exchange for the US selling them weapons,
they would release the American hostages that they held - but not until
AFTER Reagan became president. The CIA then illegally sold Iran weapons,
using Israel as a middle man, then took that money and used it to fund
the Contras death squads in Nicaragua. The Contras paid the CIA in
cocaine which they then flooded into American inner cities in the 1980's
and 1990's.

1983 - Honduras - The CIA gives Honduran military officers the Human
Resource Exploitation Training Manual, which teaches how to torture
people. Honduras' notorious "Battalion 316" then uses these techniques,
with the CIA's full knowledge, on thousands of leftist dissidents. At
least 184 are murdered.

1986 - Eugene Hasenfus - Nicaragua shoots down a C-123 transport plane
carrying military supplies to the Contras and smuggling cocaine back
into the US to fund the operation. The lone survivor, Eugene Hasenfus,
turns out to be a CIA employee, as are the two dead pilots. The airplane
belongs to Southern Air Transport, a CIA front. The incident makes a
mockery of President Reagan's claims that the CIA is not illegally
arming the Contras.

1986 - Iran/Contra Scandal - Although the details have long been known,
the Iran/Contra scandal finally captures the media's attention in
1986. Congress holds hearings, and several key figures (like Oliver
North) lie under oath to protect the intelligence community. CIA
Director William Casey dies of brain cancer before Congress can question
him. All reforms enacted by Congress after the scandal are purely
cosmetic.

1986 - Haiti - Rising popular revolt in Haiti means that "Baby Doc"
Duvalier will remain "President for Life" only if he has a short one.
The U.S., which hates instability in a puppet country, flies the
despotic Duvalier to the South of France for a comfortable
retirement. The CIA then rigs the upcoming elections in favor of another
right-wing military strongman. However, violence keeps the country in
political turmoil for another four years. The CIA tries to strengthen
the military by creating the National Intelligence Service (SIN), which
suppresses popular revolt through torture and assassination.

1989 - Panama - After first spending \$10 million to throw the Panama
election to remove President Manuel Noriega, the CIA got the military to
attempt a coup, then CIA then tried to assassinate Noriega - five
times! After failing every attempt the U.S. invades Panama to overthrow
the dictator whom the CIA had originally put in power. Noriega has been
on the CIA's payroll since 1966, and had been transporting drugs with
the CIA's knowledge since 1972. By the late 80s, Noriega's growing
independence and intransigence had angered the CIA and so he was taken
out. The media was completely blocked from the entire US action to
retrieve Noriega, and afterward there are numerous reports that indicate
the the US had used the opportunity to test a number of exotic weapons
on the population to be used a year later in the Gulf War.

1990 - Haiti - Competing against 10 comparatively wealthy candidates,
leftist priest Jean-Bertrand Aristide captures 68 percent of the vote.
After only eight months in power, however, the CIA-backed military
deposes him. More military dictators brutalize the country, as thousands
of Haitian refugees escape the turmoil in barely seaworthy boats. As
popular opinion calls for Aristide's return, the CIA begins a
disinformation campaign painting the courageous priest as mentally
unstable.

1991 - The Gulf War - Iraq's dictator, Saddam Hussein, was put into
power by the CIA. The CIA encouraged Hussein to invade Iran in 1980.
During this costly eight-year war, the CIA built up Hussein's forces
with sophisticated arms, intelligence, training and financial backing.
This cemented Hussein's power at home, allowing him to crush the many
internal rebellions that erupted from time to time, sometimes with
poison gas. As he became more powerful, he also became more independent
of CIA control. So when he indicated that he wanted to invade Kuwait he
was given the green light by the CIA. Once he invaded the US then used
that as an excuse to launch the gulf war in an attempt to remove Hussein
from power.

1991 - The Fall of the Soviet Union - The CIA fails to predict this most
important event of the Cold War. This suggests that it has been so busy
undermining governments that it hasn't been doing its primary job:
gathering and analyzing information. The fall of the Soviet Union also
robs the CIA of its reason for existence: fighting communism. In reality
the CIA intentionally failed to predict the downfall of the Soviet Union
that the CIA had started with Afghanistan. Curiously, the intelligence
community's budget is not significantly reduced after the demise of
communism.

1993 - Economic Espionage - In the years following the end of the Cold
War, the CIA is increasingly used for economic espionage. This involves
stealing the technological secrets of competing foreign companies and
giving them to American ones. Given the CIA's clear preference for dirty
tricks over mere information gathering, the possibility of serious
criminal behavior is very great indeed.

1996 - Sudan - The CIA sends \$20 million to the Sudanese opposition by
way of Ethiopia, Eritrea, and Uganda to destabilize the government in an
attempt to get them to cooperate with the US on investigations and to
expel Osama Bin Laden and 300 of his associates. The Sudanese argued
that this was a huge mistake, because while in Sudan they monitored him
and his associates, read their mail, and kept track of them. Exactly as
predicted (and likely the CIA goal all along) once Bin Laden and co.
left Sudan and hid out in Afghanistan they couldn't be tracked anywhere.

1996 - Iraq - The CIA decided to use the occasion of UN weapon's
inspectors entering Iraq to try to stage a coup to remove Saddam
Hussein. Before the coup could make much headway it was discovered by
Hussein's intelligence agency, the Mukhabarat, who arrested all of the
CIA coup assets, then called the CIA's secret line used by the coup to
tell them that the game was up. The CIA pulled out of the weapon's
inspection and hid any trace of their involvement.

2002 - Venezuela - After Venezuelan president Hugo Chavez denounced the
US invasion of Afghanistan as terror, the US recalled its ambassador to
Venezuela and sent Charles Shapiro as new ambassador. Shapiro had
extensive experience with coups in his capacity in Chile and El
Salvador. CIA-front NGO NED (National Endowment for Democracy) was sent
to Venezuela and began channeling first hundred of thousands and then
millions of dollars to try to establish and build an opposition to
Chavez. Meanwhile the US ambassador groomed Pedro Carmona, the head of
Venezuela's Chamber of Commerce, to be the new President. A staged
demonstration was used to have the military take Chavez into custody and
put Carmona in place as president, but widespread revolt by the people
demanded that Chavez be reinstated, which he was.

2003 - Iraq - After the US military invades Iraq on false pretenses,
the CIA recruits 27 brigades of "Special Police," merging the most
brutal of Saddam's security forces with the Iranian-trained Badr militia
to form death squads that murdered tens of thousands of mostly Sunni
Arab men and boys in Baghdad and elsewhere in a reign of terror that
continues to this day.

2004 - Ukraine - In an attempt to continue to turn former Soviet states
in to NATO stronghold, the CIA launched a campaign to oust the president
of Ukraine and install a US puppet. CIA-controlled NGO USAID as well as
CIA -compliant NGOs Freedon House and Soros' Open Society flooded
Ukraine with money to establish and grow an opposition to the current
president. The CIA has been said to have spent \$14 million to get a
color revolution going to oust the pro-Russian Prime Minister Viktor
Yanukovych, and put in his place CIA-puppet Viktor Yushchenko. As soon
as the people of Ukraine could vote again in 2010, the resoundingly got
rid of the US puppet and returned Yanukovych to power.

2004 - Haiti - Former president Aristide is allowed to take over Haiti
only after agreeing to demands by the CIA. After eventually deciding
that President Aristide would not play ball, the CIA trained what they
called "Haitian rebel forces" just over the boarder in the Dominican
Republic. These troops were later used to invade Haiti and depose
Aristide.

2005 - Iran - President Bush authorizes the CIA to undertake black
operations in an attempt to destabilize the Iranian government. Over the
next few year \$215 million was allocated to this project, much of it
spent on dissident groups and radicals. The nature of this changed when
it was decided to instead take out Iran's Natanz nuclear facility as a
way of dissuading Israel from attacking it with nuclear weapons. A joint
CIA/Israeli team worked on a plan to insert viral code into the Iranian
computers that controlled the centrifuges. This virus would eventually
become known as the Stuxnet virus.

2006 - Somalia - After the collapse of the Somali government in 1991 the
country fell into chaos. As a result a system of sharia law-based courts
became the main judicial system. Funded through litigant fees, it
eventually came to offer citizens services such as education and health
care, acted as local police forces. It was so successful that these
courts joined together to form the Islamic Courts Union. A successful
Islamic government could not be allowed by the CIA in the era of the War
on Terror, so the CIA funded secular warlords to create and opposition,
called the Alliance for the Restoration of Peace and Counter-Terrorism.
By claiming that the arms flooding the country by the CIA for their
secular group were instead intended for the Islamic Courts Union, the
CIA was able to get the Ethiopian military to attack Somalia and begin
the devastating War in Somalia. Most of the CIA actions were run from
their station house in Nairobi, Kenya.

2009 - Honduras - The CIA sponsors a coup d'etat to oust the
left-leaning President Manuel Zalaya. The military junta running things
behind the scenes conducts severe repression using death squads to
murder political opponents, union organizers, and journalists.

2011 - Libya - Since his coming to power in 1969 the CIA has tried at
least four times to overthrow or otherwise remove Muammar Gadhafi,
several of which were in partnership with the Israeli Mossad. Numerous
acts of terrorism were committed by the CIA as well as the Mossad and
blamed on Gadhafi and Libya. Two particular events pushed the CIA to
finally destroy Libya: first Gadhafi stated that he would find other
places to sell Libya's oil and cut off the US and Europe. The US and
Europe are highly dependent on the very high quality "sweet" oil
extremely low in sulfur only found in Libya (European refineries cannot
process higher sulfur crude oil). Second, Gadhafi announced that he was
launching a currency for all of Africa called the Gold Dinar. This
currency would be backed by Libya with gold, and would be the currency
for the continent. As a result Gadhafi would no longer sell Libyan oil
in US dollars. So the standard ops were set in motion: CIA cover NGOs
NED and USAID began setting up and funding opposition to Gadhafi in
Libya. The Libyan people proved so loyal to Gadhafi that the CIA was
forced to bring in Al Qaeda forces and claim that they were Libyan
rebels. Once this fake uprising was put in place, the US claimed that
Gadhafi was killing 100-of-thousands of his own people - while providing
zero proof. They then used NATO and UN forces to completely destroy the
billions of dollars in infrastructure that Gadhafi had put in place for
the Libyan people, eventually having the CIA agents tell the Al Qaeda
rebels where to find Gadhafi and they then killed him.

2012 - Syria - The CIA began covertly funding a Syrian opposition as
early as 2006. But it was with the fall of Libya that the project went
into overdrive. The CIA took the weapons and many of the into Libya and
moved them into terrorist groups in Syria. Classified documents show
that even after being warned that that funding terrorist groups would
lead to the formation of ISIS/ISIL the response was that it would be a
"strategic advantage" over the Assad government and drag it into a proxy
war. The ultimate goal was the support of a plan from Israel to break
Syria and Iraq into smaller ethnic states: the ISIS/ISIL group would
form Sunnistan, and the Kurds would form Kurdistan, with others to
follow after these were established. It is estimated that as many as
100,000 Syrian soldiers have died fighting this CIA proxy was. It has
only been the requested intervention of the Russian government that
stopped Syria succumbing to the fate of Libya.

2013 - Venezuela - With the death of Hugo Chavez of cancer (the 5th
leader of a South American country opposed to the US to suffer from
cancer within 5 years) the CIA saw it's opportunity to finally
destabilize Venezuela. In the run up to the election one month following
Chavez' death, the main candidates were Nicolas Maduro (Chavez'
hand-picked successor), and Henrique Capriles (the right-wing
candidate). The CIA closely supported, trained and funded Capriles in
the hopes of his winning, but even if he didn't he would act as a
destabilizing force for Venezuela. The initial plan had been for a
tight, acrimonious campaign with called from Capriles of vote
tampering/rigging etc. and then the CIA planned to assassinate Capriles
so that the Maduro campaign would get the blame, throwing the country
into chaos. The Maduro administration found out about the plot and
announced it to the press, do gales of shocked denial by the US. Once
Maduro won the election Capriles began a campaign of accusations, and
calls for international support for him. The CAI has used old friends
NED and USAID to stage the usual group of students and others as
opposition to destabilize the government of Maduro while the US has been
causing havoc with Venezuela's economy.

2014 - Ukraine - For the second time in 10 years, the CIA staged another
coup in Ukraine. Using almost exactly the same model, NGOs were brought
in to fund an opposition, it has been claimed that the US spent \$5
billion on this coup. Pierre Omidyar, founder of eBay was also a
prominent funder of the coup. Staged violence was also used to try and
pin the blame on those loyal to Yanukovych. This time though, the CIA
planned to remove most of the pro-Russian voted by creating hostilities
with the largely Russian east of Ukraine. The coup leaders fraudulently
claimed that the Prime Minister was no longer in charge and seized
power. Yanukovich fled to Russia, and the CIA and it's new puppet regime
began a civil war with the Russian sympathetic east Ukrainians.

2015 - Venezuela - The CIA had again tried to stage a coup in Venzuela,
this time to take down Chavez' successor President Nicolas Maduro. The
CIA plan had been to use NGOs again to incite unrest in the streets,
then to overthrow the elected government with a campaign of violence,
including mass killings and tactical bombings of strategic sites across
Caracas. When the dust cleared, the coup plotters expected key
government officials, including Maduro to have been assassinated, with
the country then firmly in their control. Unfortunately for the CIA, the
Maduro government found out, arrested all the coup leaders, revealed the
US embassy coordination, and revealed all to the media.

2016 - Brazil - After the 2010 election, and 2014 re-election of
left-leaning President Dilma Rousseff, the NSA and CIA worked together
to oust her from power, the final straw being Brazil's involvement in
BRICS (the monetary organization of Brazil, Russia, India, China, and
South Africa). Using the wildly corrupt Brazilian congress the NSA and
CIA provided collected info to allow the Senate and Lower House to
fraudulently impeach her. Temer, her replacement, is widely hated,
rampantly corrupt, and a CIA proxy. He is expected to start privatizing
much of Brazil's natural resources.

2016 - South Africa - Once South Africa joined the BRICS economic group,
the CIA began its usual destabilization games. CIA-controlled NGOs were
brought in to create and grow opposition to President Jacob Zuma, which
recently took the form of Student Protests over fees.