---
title: Costa Rica
permalink: /Costa_Rica/
---

**Costa Rica**, officially the **Republic of Costa Rica** is a
[liberal](Liberalism "wikilink"), [colonial](Colonialism "wikilink"),
[capitalist](Capitalism "wikilink") [state](List_of_States "wikilink")
located in Central America next to [Nicaragua](Nicaragua "wikilink") and
[Panama](Panama "wikilink").

## Positives

- Costa Rica lacks a military, making it the most peaceful country in
  Latin America. This also created political stability as it prevented
  the military from launching coups.
- Costa Rica has the highest levels of life expectancy and literacy in
  Latin America.
- Costa Rica also has progressive environmental policies. It is the only
  country to meet all five UNDP criteria established to measure
  environmental sustainability. It was identified by the NEF as the
  greenest country in the world in 2009. By 2019, 99.62% of its
  electricity was generated from green sources particularly hydro, wind,
  geothermal and solar.

### Negatives

- Costa Rica has major issues with racism towards indigenous people.
  - Indigenous land rights are frequently ignored in favour of mining,
    oil and hydroelectric construction.
  - Indigenous teachers and students are not receiving the same
    opportunities as the non indigenous peoples. There were two cases in
    Boruca and Teribe in which qualified indigenous teachers were not
    given jobs in the local schools. There is also the fact that the
    schools which the indigenous attend are not funded properly, and the
    students aren't given the same resources to learn.
  - Indigenous peoples of Costa Rica often do not receive adequate
    healthcare services due to lack of access: they are situated in
    difficult terrain, particularly in the mountains. Some areas have
    built clinics, but doctors are available only two days of the week.
  - Only about 26% of the Indigenous population have access to clean
    water.
- Costa Rica has a fair big of discrimination towards LGBT people. This
  can in part be attributed to the continued influence of the Roman
  Catholic Church in Costa Rica, making citizens more socially
  conservative.
  - A 1999 national opinion poll which found 80% of Costa Ricans who
    responded believed homosexuality was “never justifiable”.
  - Police harassment and raids on LGBT people in both public and
    private properties were frequent.
  - Discrimination in the professional sphere was also prominent, many
    being fired or abused for their sexual identity.
  - AIDS healthcare remains minimal due to surrounding stigma.
  - In 1990 Government Minister Desanti placed a ban on foreign women
    travelling alone, with short hair or wearing pants, from entering
    Costa Rica, in case they were there to participate in a national
    meeting of Lesbians, known as “Encuentro”; it was not until the late
    1990s that the Costa Rican Supreme Court ruled that the right of
    LGBT people to peaceful assembly was outlined in the constitution.
  - In the late 1990s LGBT tourists to Costa Rica were labelled as
    predatory sex tourists who were not welcome in the country by
    Eduardo Leon-Paez.
- Costa Rica has criminalised abortion except in cases of maternal life,
  mental health, physical health and/or rape.

## History

### Indigenous History

Humans began to live in Costa Rica around 12,000 - 9,000 years ago,
inhabited by nomadic family-based clans of foragers. Living off giant
armadillos and sloths and vegetables. The area was sparsely populated by
indigenous people compared to other areas.

### Spanish Empire

The [Spanish Empire](Spanish_Empire "wikilink") claimed Costa Rica in
1502, and it was largely left as an undeveloped area of land. Of course,
the Spanish Empire waged a brutal war of extermination against the
indigenous population.

### Independence

Costa Rica joined in the Latin American Wars of Independence and broke
free from the Spanish Empire in 1821 and became a part of the United
Provinces of Central America (later called the Federal Republic of
Central America) and became independent after a war in 1835, and became
a [democratic republic in
1847](Timeline_of_Representative_Democracy "wikilink") with universal
male suffrage but remained extremely poor due to lack of infrastructure
and industry. In 1856, the Costa Rican army attacked [William
Walker's](William_Walker "wikilink") efforts to set up slave colonies in
Nicaragua and defeated him.

### Liberal State

In 1870 the government was overthrown by
[liberals](Liberalism "wikilink"), who abolished the [death
penalty](Death_Penalty "wikilink"), [torture](torture "wikilink") and
set presidential term limits to four years. However, the government
engaged in religious persecution and attempted to be increasingly
authoritarian while developing an export economy centered around the
exporting of banana and coffee. However, the government later relaxed
its religious persecution and allowed protestants and buddhists into the
country. The country was modernised as railways were built, however, the
United Fruit Company began to own most of the land and infrastructure in
the country.

### 20th Century

In 1917, a military dictator rose in the country, but he fell in 1919.
In 1921, Costa Rica invaded Panama to claim several towns and it won.
But the liberal state entered crisis in 1929 with the [Great
Depression](Great_Depression "wikilink"). The [Communist
Party](Communist_Party_of_Costa_Rica "wikilink") led a workers' movement
and several strikes and a welfare state was created as the government
followed [Keynesian](Keynesian_Economics "wikilink") theory and built up
their infrastructure. The reforms and political violence were extremely
controversial and led to a bloody civil war that killed 2,000 people.

The war was one by José Figueres Ferrer, a [social
democrat](Social_Democracy "wikilink") who abolished the army to prevent
another civil war. This meant Costa Rica was spared the fate of most
Latin American countries in the 20th century which fell into brutal
civil wars, dictatorships, invasions or rigged elections because of [US
imperialism](Timeline_of_US_Imperialism "wikilink") as there was no army
to turn against the government meaning a direct invasion was the only
possible measure. The government also gave women rights to vote,
nationalised banks, expanded the welfare state, outlawed the communist
party, guaranteed public education, citizenship for immigrants and
cracking down on government corruption. Although the governments support
for the [Caribbean Legion](Caribbean_Legion "wikilink") was extremely
controversial.

The country entered a strange relationship with the USA, where it
received some support from the CIA but did not assist in wars in
neighbouring countries and retained progressive policies, notably
expanding into environmental protection recently, being considered one
of the most environmentally friendly countries in the world.

## References

[Costa Rica](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Costa_Rica) at
[Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink")

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink") [Category:Costa
Rica](Category:Costa_Rica "wikilink") [Category:Central
America](Category:Central_America "wikilink")
[Category:States](Category:States "wikilink") [Category:Liberal
States](Category:Liberal_States "wikilink") [Category:Colonial
States](Category:Colonial_States "wikilink")