---
title: Dalian Anti-Factory Campaign (2011)
permalink: /Dalian_Anti-Factory_Campaign_(2011)/
---

The **Dalian Anti-Factory Campaign of 2011** was a
[student](student.md "wikilink")-led [environmental
protest](Timeline_of_Environmentalism.md "wikilink") in Dalian, Liaoning,
[China](China.md "wikilink") in
[2011](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Eastern_Asia.md "wikilink").

## Background

When the tropical storm Muifa broke along the shore of the northeastern
Chinese city of Dalian on the 8th of August 2011 it broke through the
protective dike in front of the Jinzhou Industrial Complex. The dike was
immediately protecting some 20 metal tanks holding oil-based chemicals
at the Fujia Chemical Plant. The Chinese government dispatched emergency
workers, the Dalian Border Guard, and the military to provide emergency
repairs to the dike. Local residents near the plant were evacuated.

The Chinese government reported later that week that no chemicals
escaped, but residents expressed their concerns on the Sina Micro blog
(Weibo) that they did not trust the government’s report. Local
television host Bai-Yansong publicly complained when a CCTV (China’s
government-controlled news source) show on dangerous projects in Dalian
was cancelled. When his micro blog was frozen, he created a new account
and criticized government infringement on “the public information
sphere.” Other reports indicate that journalists inquiring at the Fujia
plant that week had been denied and detained. When official reports were
leaked that the plant had not fulfilled initial environmental impact
tests, residents became increasingly incensed. Resident concern over the
danger of the Fujia Plant spread widely in Dalian following the storm
and the public censorship of information. Residents began to call for
the removal of the plant and the paraxylene that the plant produced.
Paraxylene (PX) is a benzene-based chemical used to make polyester
products as well as plastic bags and bottles. PX is carcinogenic and can
cause severe damage to vital organs and death.

## Events

A poster was spread about the micro blogs on 13 August calling for a
“group stroll” on Sunday 14 August from 10am on the People’s Square
toward the Municipal Government Building in Dalian. The term “stroll”
had been previously adopted by other grassroots activists in China as a
euphemism for protest marches. Blog posts also show that during the week
of 8 August, Dalians were increasingly talking about the [Xiamen
Anti-Factory Campaign from
2007](Xiamen_Anti-Factory_Campaign_(2007).md "wikilink"), which
successfully led to the shutdown of a PX plant in that region. Reports
indicate that an initial group of protesters gathered at the Municipal
Building and commenced a sit-in there early Sunday morning. By midday
the 14th of Sunday official government estimates report over 12,000
protesters gathered in front of the Dalian Municipal Government
Building. Other estimates run as high as 70,000 protesters. There were
many riot police, though specific numbers are unknown. Though some
scuffles were reported by government media, including the throwing of
water bottles at police officers, the protesters remained widely
nonviolent and details of the scuffles were unclear. It is reported that
at one point the protesters broke out in song, singing the Chinese
national anthem.

Marchers were clearly highly organized, with preprinted shirts, signs,
and slogans stating “Get out Fujia PX!,” “PX out!,” “I love Dalian and
reject poison!,” and “Protect Dalian!” amongst others. Though the
identity of organizers is not yet known, it is widely accepted that
social media and micro blogging were crucial for the spread of
information amongst Dalian residents. In an attempt to disperse the
crowds, local Communist Party Secretary Tang Jun climbed atop a police
vehicle to address the crowds that Sunday. He promised to close and move
the Fujia plant but was met with chants of “Time!” “When will it move!,”
and protesters did not disperse.

## Results

The factory was closed as a result of the protest and extensive internet
censorship began, but it failed to stop the spread and inspired numerous
environmental protests in China.

## See Also

- [Chinese Protest Wave (2007 -
  2014)](Chinese_Protest_Wave_(2007_-_2014).md "wikilink")
- [Haining Anti-Factory
  Campaign](Haining_Anti-Pollution_Campaign_(2011).md "wikilink")

## References

[Global Nonviolent Action
Database](Global_Nonviolent_Action_Database.md "wikilink") - [Chinese
middle class protesters challenge chemical plant in Dalian,
2011](https://nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu/content/chinese-middle-class-protesters-challenge-chemical-plant-dalian-2011)

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink")
[Category:Uprisings](Category:Uprisings.md "wikilink")
[Category:China](Category:China.md "wikilink")
[Category:Asia](Category:Asia.md "wikilink") [Category:Eastern
Asia](Category:Eastern_Asia.md "wikilink")
[Category:2011](Category:2011.md "wikilink")
[Category:2010s](Category:2010s.md "wikilink") [Category:Revolutions of
2010 - 2015](Category:Revolutions_of_2010_-_2015.md "wikilink")
[Category:21st Century](Category:21st_Century.md "wikilink")
[Category:Environmentalism](Category:Environmentalism.md "wikilink")