---
title: Danish General Strike (1998)
permalink: /Danish_General_Strike_(1998)/
---

The **Danish General Strike of 1998** was a [general
strike](List_of_General_Strikes "wikilink") in
[Denmark](Denmark "wikilink") in
[1998](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Northern_Europe "wikilink")
led by public sector unions in response to a booming economy where
workers rights lagged behind.

## Background

The 1990s were a time of economic boom for Denmark, which also had some
of the highest levels of [union membership](Trade_Union "wikilink") in
the world. However, workers rights lagged behind and many workers were
angry, union negotiations failed and a strike was called, with several
basic demands, including:

- Introduction of a 35-hour work week
- An extra week of paid leave a year (the Women Workers Union demanded
  20 extra days)
- 6% increase in wages

## Events

Around 500,000 people walked out on the morning of the 27th, roughly a
fifth of the entire Danish working class, and the effect of the strike
was felt immediately across many industries. Work in manufacturing,
construction, airports, the food industry, media outlets and private
transportation comapnies ground to a halt, and many shops, bars and
petrol stations had to close as employees joined the walkout. Many
schools were also forced to shut due to a lack of cleaners. Effects of
the strike even managed to cross over to [Sweden](Sweden "wikilink")
where airport workers refused to load planes heading for Denmark.
Employer scaremongering instantly went into action, and many newspapers
(those that were still running) began to print stories warning readers
that the strike would bring "chaos" to the country, and that food and
fuel supplies would run out. After guarantees from unions that food
supplies would be ensured, this bid to turn public opinion against the
strike failed to sway many sections of the population, who remained
sympathetic to the strikers' cause. The essential supply of food was put
under union control, and fuel required for vital services (such as
running ambulances) could be obtained with written permission from the
General Workers Union. Not wishing to undermine the fuel workers
involved in the strike, requests for fuel that didn't constitute
emergencies were turned down, including requests from the
[police](police "wikilink").

A shop stewards meeting aimed at extending and coordinating the strike
was held in Odense on the 29th, and the possibility of participation
from public sector unions was discussed. Hopes of involvement proved
groundless however after public sector unions refused to ballot their
members, despite maintaining that they supported the strikers' demands.
Commenting on the level of control the unions had so far exercised over
supply of essential goods, one shop steward was quoted as saying, "You
see, it is the employers who want to shut down Denmark, not us. They
cannot run the country without the workers, but we can run the country
without the employers".

Economic pressure was increasing on employers, and the strike continued
to grow. Within a week the strike was costing the economy a billion
Kroner (about \$200m) a day in lost output, and many foreign companies
threatened to withdraw investment in Denmark if the strike went on
longer than 10 days. Growing increasingly desperate for a solution after
rejecting an offer of government mediation on the second day of the
strike, some employers began to threaten a lock-out.

[May Day](May_Day "wikilink") marked the fifth day of the strike, and a
gigantic demonstration took place in Copenhagen. Exceeding all
expectations, up to half a million workers and supporters took to the
streets and marched through the city. Far from the optimistic feeling
amongst the marchers, leaders of the main unions declared on the same
day that achieving the main aims of the strike would not be possible,
and a compromise would have to be accepted, despite the solidity of the
strike.

May 5 saw the employers threat of a lock-out become a reality. Affecting
some 60,000 workers, mostly shop workers and electricians, the lock-out
panicked union leaders, and it was resolved that a quick end to the
strike should be sought.

On May 7, the social-democratic led government stepped in. Calling the
strike "irresponsible", the government offered an extra two days paid
holiday a year. The proposal was submitted to parliament and approved,
with active support from the conservative opposition, who had advocated
outright strikebreaking throughout the conflict. A shop stewards meeting
was held on May 8, which saw union leaders urge an acceptance of the
agreement, saying that it was the best that could be achieved. Calls for
a general strike erupted throughout the meeting hall, and many union
officials did not get a chance to speak. The next day saw a protest
outside parliament of 20,000 strikers. However, the legislation pushed
through parliament had declared the strike illegal, and the deal was
accepted by unions without putting it to a vote of their members.

Most strikers returned to work on May 11, although there were sporadic
one day walkouts in many areas in protest at the end of the strike. Many
workers believed that had they stayed out for another week the strike
could have been won, and the premature return to work served only to
increase already widespread dissatisfaction within the unions. The reach
of the strike and resolve of the workers involved was remarkable
throughout, and despite not achieving their main demands after the
deception of the unions, Danish workers had demonstrated the power that
lies within the mass strike.

## Results

The strike gained an extra two days of paid holiday leave a year.

## Analysis

The strike is seen as a classic example of trade union leaders betraying
the working class.

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Events](Category:Events "wikilink") [Category:General
Strikes](Category:General_Strikes "wikilink")
[Category:Denmark](Category:Denmark "wikilink") [Category:Northern
Europe](Category:Northern_Europe "wikilink")
[Category:Europe](Category:Europe "wikilink")
[Category:1998](Category:1998 "wikilink")
[Category:1990s](Category:1990s "wikilink") [Category:20th
Century](Category:20th_Century "wikilink")