---
title: Diretas Ja
permalink: /Diretas_Ja/
---

**Diretas JÃ¡** (English: Direct Now) was a grassroots social movement
that emerged in [Brazil](Brazil "wikilink") in the
[mid-1980s](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_South_America "wikilink")
demanding the end of [military
dictatorship](military_Dictatorship_of_Brazil "wikilink") and creation
of a [liberal democracy](Representative_Democracy "wikilink").

## Background

Since 1962, Brazil had been a US-backed military dictatorship that
oppressed its population and horribly mismanaged its economy that hurt
the poor. After a politician proposed a law to democratise the country,
the social movement emerged.

## Events

The first protests occurred on the 31st of March, with just simple
marches that occurred throughout the years. Combined with increasingly
disgruntled soldiers who had seen their wages eroded by threatening
their commanders, the government began to fear an all out uprising. They
subjected the new law to vote in the parliament and shut down all TV and
Radio stations and mobilised the military. Fortunately, the law was
voted on and the country began to democratise.

## Results

The movement successfully toppled the dictatorship in Brazil and created
a democratic government.

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Brazil](Category:Brazil "wikilink") [Category:South
America](Category:South_America "wikilink")
[Category:1983](Category:1983 "wikilink")
[Category:1984](Category:1984 "wikilink")
[Category:1980s](Category:1980s "wikilink") [Category:20th
Century](Category:20th_Century "wikilink") [Category:Social
Movements](Category:Social_Movements "wikilink")