---
title: Direct Action (Canada)
permalink: /Direct_Action_(Canada)/
---

*Not to be confused with [Action Directe](Action_Directe.md "wikilink") in
France or the [concept of Direct
Action](Direct_Action_(Concept).md "wikilink")*

**Direct Action** was a group of [insurrectionary
anarchists](Insurrectionary_Anarchism.md "wikilink") committed to
[anti-imperialism](Anti-Imperialism.md "wikilink"),
[feminism](feminism.md "wikilink") and
[environmentalism](environmentalism.md "wikilink") who took out three
bombings against corporations in [Canada](Canada.md "wikilink") in
[1982](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_North_America.md "wikilink")
before their arrest in January 1983.

## Members

- Ann Hansen - Now a freelance writer
- Brent Taylor - Considered the "intellectual leader"
- Juliet Caroline Belmas - Now a filmmaker who focuses on prisons
- Doug Stewart
- Gerry Hannah - Later became a punk musician in the 2000s

## Actions

### Early Actions

The first actions associated with the group included vandalizing the
headquarters of Amax, a mining company which had been granted a [special
exemption from environmental laws](Regulatory_Capture.md "wikilink"), and
offices of the British Columbia Ministry of Environment.

After these actions, the group dispersed. Belmas and Hannah retreated to
the Rocky Mountains, and Hansen, Taylor, and Stewart moved underground
together, becoming more militant. They began training with stolen
weapons in a deserted area north of Vancouver, and stole a large cache
of dynamite used for construction work. They supported themselves
through various forms of fraud and theft.

### Cheekye-Dunsmuir bombing

On the 30th of May 1982, Hansen, Taylor, and Stewart traveled to
Vancouver Island and set off a large bomb at the [Dunsmuir BC Hydro
substation](Electricity.md "wikilink") causing \$5 million in damages. Four
transformers were damaged beyond repair, but no one was injured. The
hydroelectric project had been criticized by some as environmentally
unsound and contributing to the destruction of wilderness on the Island.

### Litton Industries bombing

In October, 1982, the five filled a stolen pick-up truck with 550 kg
(1,210 lb) of dynamite and drove from Vancouver to Toronto. Their target
was Litton Industries, a company producing guidance components for the
controversial American cruise missiles many feared would increase the
risk of nuclear war. The bomb was detonated on the 14th of October,
1982, and was intended to cause only property destruction. The van was
parked in full view of corporate security, with an elaborate "warning
box" duct taped to the hood, displaying a message, a digital clock
counting down, and a single stick of dynamite to draw attention to the
danger.

Belmas called the security desk and warned them of the explosion, giving
instructions on exactly what to do and where the danger area was. The
security personnel, however, suspected a hoax, and did not respond
quickly enough to evacuate the facility before the explosion. The
evacuation was just getting started when the bomb detonated minutes
ahead of schedule, injuring ten people. Meanwhile, at the back of the
factory, where the guidance system was being produced, no damage was
done. The only damage was to a storage area where parts were kept prior
to production, and the offices above and around the storage area.

### Red Hot Video firebombing

The bombers fled Toronto for Vancouver and ceased their activities as
they moved underground together. On the 22nd of November, 1982, they
re-emerged as part of a larger group under the name "[Wimmin's Fire
Brigade](Wimmin's_Fire_Brigade.md "wikilink")". They subsequently
firebombed three franchises of Red Hot Video, a chain of video
pornography stores which had attracted the attention of feminist
activists and was accused of selling snuff films. The majority of the
stores either closed or changed names. Ann Hansen alleges in her memoirs
that the police had them under surveillance at the time of the Red Hot
Video action, which would mean the police broke the law in order to get
the evidence needed to proceed with the charges on the earlier bombings.

## Arrest

The nature of the high-profile crimes had attracted major police
attention and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) closed in. On the
morning of the 20th of January, 1983, all five were captured on the road
to their training area by an RCMP tactical unit disguised as a road
crew. Upon hearing her sentence for life, Ann Hansen threw a tomato at
the judge. All are now out of prison.

## References

[Squamish Five](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Squamish_Five) at
[Wikipedia](Wikipedia.md "wikilink")

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink")
[Category:Canada](Category:Canada.md "wikilink")
[Category:1982](Category:1982.md "wikilink")
[Category:1980s](Category:1980s.md "wikilink") [Category:20th
Century](Category:20th_Century.md "wikilink") [Category:North
America](Category:North_America.md "wikilink")
[Category:Feminism](Category:Feminism.md "wikilink")
[Category:Anti-Imperialism](Category:Anti-Imperialism.md "wikilink")
[Category:Environmentalism](Category:Environmentalism.md "wikilink")
[Category:Insurrectionary
Anarchism](Category:Insurrectionary_Anarchism.md "wikilink")
[Category:Propaganda of the
Deed](Category:Propaganda_of_the_Deed.md "wikilink")