---
title: Djibouti
permalink: /Djibouti/
---

**Djibouti**, officially the **Republic of Djibouti** is an
[authoritarian](authoritarianism.md "wikilink") and
[capitalist](Capitalism.md "wikilink") [state](List_of_States.md "wikilink")
in Northeast Africa near [Ethiopia](Ethiopia.md "wikilink"),
[Eritrea](Eritrea.md "wikilink"), [Somalia](Somalia.md "wikilink") and
[Yemen](Yemen.md "wikilink").

## History

The Djibouti area has been inhabited since at least the Neolithic 12,000
years ago. Pottery predating the mid-2nd millennium BC has been found at
Asa Koma, an inland lake area on the Gobaad Plain. The site's ware is
characterized by punctate and incision geometric designs, which bear a
similarity to the Sabir culture phase 1 ceramics from Ma'layba in
Southern Arabia.<sup>\[1\]</sup> Long-horned humpless cattle bones have
also been discovered at Asa Koma, suggesting that domesticated cattle
was present by around 3,500 years ago.<sup>\[2\]</sup> Rock art of what
appear to be antelopes and a giraffe are likewise found at Dorra and
Balho.<sup>\[3\]</sup> A team of archaeologists discovered funds stone
houses, the walls of a rectangular edifice with orienteer recess to
Mecca. They have also updated shards of ceramics, chipped stone tools
and a glass bead. The oldest engravings discovered to date are from the
fourth or third millennium BC in the pre-Islamic period, the most famous
is the site of Handoga there where the ruins of a village squares
subcircular dry stone delivered different objects.<sup>\[*clarification
needed*\]</sup> An old settlement, Handoga is the site of numerous
ancient ruins and buildings, many of obscure origins, including ceramic
shards, matching vases used brazier<sup>\[*clarification
needed*\]</sup>, containers that can hold water, several choppers and
microliths, blades, drills, trenchers basalt, rhyolite or obsidian. A
team of archaeologists discovered an elephant 1.6 million years BC near
the area. They also found a pearl orange coralline, three glass
paste<sup>\[*clarification needed*\]</sup>, but there were no metal
objects discovered.<sup>\[*citation needed*\]</sup>

## Antiquity

Main article: Land of Punt

Egyptian marines from Queen Hatshepsut's Year 9 expedition to the Land
of Punt, as depicted on her temple at Deir el-Bahri.

Together with northern Somalia, Eritrea and the Red Sea coast of Sudan,
Djibouti is considered the most likely location of the land known to the
ancient Egyptians as *Punt* (or "Ta Netjeru", meaning "God's Land"). The
old territory's first mention dates to the 25th century
BC.<sup>\[4\]</sup> The Puntites were a nation of people that had close
relations with Ancient Egypt during the times of Pharaoh Sahure of the
fifth dynasty and Queen Hatshepsut of the eighteenth dynasty. They
"traded not only in their own produce of incense, ebony and short-horned
cattle, but also in goods from other neighbouring regions, including
gold, ivory and animal skins."<sup>\[5\]</sup> According to the temple
reliefs at Deir el-Bahari, the Land of Punt at the time of Hatshepsut
was ruled by King Parahu and Queen Ati.<sup>\[6\]</sup>

## Macrobians

The Macrobians (Μακροβίοι) were a legendary people and kingdom
positioned in the Horn of Africa mentioned by Herodotus. Later authors
(such as Pliny on the authority of Ctesias' *Indika*) place them in
India instead. It is one of the legendary peoples postulated at the
extremity of the known world (from the perspective of the Greeks), in
this case in the extreme south, contrasting with the Hyperboreans in the
extreme east.

Their name is due to their legendary longevity; an average person
supposedly living to the age of 120.<sup>\[7\]</sup> They were said to
be the "tallest and handsomest of all men".<sup>\[8\]</sup>

According to Herodotus' account, the Persian Emperor Cambyses II upon
his conquest of Egypt (525 BC) sent ambassadors to Macrobia, bringing
luxury gifts for the Macrobian king to entice his submission. The
Macrobian ruler, who was elected based at least in part on stature,
replied instead with a challenge for his Persian counterpart in the form
of an unstrung bow: if the Persians could manage to string it, they
would have the right to invade his country; but until then, they should
thank the gods that the Macrobians never decided to invade their
empire.<sup>\[8\]\[9\]</sup>

## Adal Sultanate

Main article: Adal Sultanate

The Sultan of Adal (right) and his troops battling King Yagbea-Sion and
his men.

Islam was introduced to the area early on from the Arabian peninsula,
shortly after the hijra. Zeila's two-mihrab Masjid al-Qiblatayn dates to
the 7th century, and is the oldest mosque in the city.<sup>\[10\]</sup>
In the late 9th century, Al-Yaqubi wrote that Muslims were living along
the northern Horn seaboard.<sup>\[11\]</sup> He also mentioned that the
Adal kingdom had its capital in Zeila, a port city in the northwestern
Awdal region abutting Djibouti.<sup>\[11\]\[12\]</sup> This suggests
that the Adal Sultanate with Zeila as its headquarters dates back to at
least the 9th or 10th century. According to I.M. Lewis, the polity was
governed by local dynasties consisting of Somalized Arabs or Arabized
Somalis, who also ruled over the similarly-established Sultanate of
Mogadishu in the Benadir region to the south. Adal's history from this
founding period forth would be characterized by a succession of battles
with neighbouring Abyssinia.<sup>\[12\]</sup> At its height, the Adal
kingdom controlled large parts of modern-day Djibouti, Somalia, Eritrea
and Ethiopia. Between Djibouti City and Loyada are a number of
anthropomorphic and phallic stelae. The structures are associated with
graves of rectangular shape flanked by vertical slabs, as also found in
Tiya, central Ethiopia. The Djibouti-Loyada stelae are of uncertain age,
and some of them are adorned with a T-shaped symbol.<sup>\[13\]</sup>
Additionally, archaeological excavations at Tiya have yielded
tombs.<sup>\[14\]</sup> As of 1997, 118 stelae were reported in the
area. Along with the stelae in the Hadiya Zone, the structures are
identified by local residents as *Yegragn Dingay* or "Gran's stone", in
reference to Imam Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Ghazi (Ahmad "Gurey" or "Gran"),
ruler of the Adal Sultanate.<sup>\[15\]</sup>

## Ifat Sultanate

Main article: Ifat Sultanate

The Ifat Sultanate was a medieval kingdom in the Horn of Africa. Founded
in 1285 by the Walashma dynasty, it was centered in
Zeila.<sup>\[16\]\[17\]</sup> Ifat established bases in Djibouti and
northern Somalia, and from there expanded southward to the Ahmar
Mountains. Its Sultan Umar Walashma (or his son Ali, according to
another source) is recorded as having conquered the Sultanate of Shewa
in 1285. Taddesse Tamrat explains Sultan Umar's military expedition as
an effort to consolidate the Muslim territories in the Horn, in much the
same way as Emperor Yekuno Amlak was attempting to unite the Christian
territories in the highlands during the same period. These two states
inevitably came into conflict over Shewa and territories further south.
A lengthy war ensued, but the Muslim sultanates of the time were not
strongly unified. Ifat was finally defeated by Emperor Amda Seyon I of
Ethiopia in 1332, and withdrew from Shewa.

## Egypt Eyalet

Main article: Egypt Eyalet

Governor Abou Baker ordered the Egyptian garrison at Sagallo to retire
to Zeila. The cruiser Seignelay reached Sagallo shortly after the
Egyptians had departed. French troops occupied the fort despite protests
from the British Agent in Aden, Major Frederick Mercer Hunter, who
dispatched troops to safeguard British and Egyptian interests in Zeila
and prevent further extension of French influence in that
direction.<sup>\[18\]</sup> On the 14 April 1884 the Commander of the
patrol sloop L’Inferent reported on the Egyptian occupation in the Gulf
of Tadjoura. The Commander of the patrol sloop Le Vaudreuil reported
that the Egyptians were occupying the interior between Obock and
Tadjoura. Emperor Johannes IV of Ethiopia signed an accord with the
United Kingdom to cease fighting the Egyptians and to allow the
evacuation of Egyptian forces from Ethiopia and the Somali Coast ports.
The Egyptian garrison was withdrawn from Tadjoura. Léonce Lagarde
deployed a patrol sloop to Tadjoura the following night.

## French Somaliland

Main articles: French Somaliland and List of colonial heads of Djibouti
(French Somaliland)

French Somaliland in 1922

It was Rochet d'Hericourt's exploration into Shoa (1839–42) that marked
the beginning of French interest in the Djiboutian coast of the Red Sea.
Further exploration by Henri Lambert, French Consular Agent at Aden, and
Captain Fleuriot de Langle led to a treaty of friendship and assistance
between France and the sultans of Raheita, Tadjoura, and Gobaad, from
whom the French purchased the anchorage of Obock in 1862.

Growing French interest in the area took place against a backdrop of
British activity in Egypt and the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869.
Between 1883–87, France signed various treaties with the then ruling
Somali and Afar Sultans, which allowed it to expand the protectorate to
include the Gulf of Tadjoura.<sup>\[19\]\[20\]</sup> Léonce Lagarde was
subsequently installed as the protectorate's governor. In 1894, he
established a permanent French administration in the city of Djibouti
and named the region *Côte française des Somalis* (French Somaliland), a
name which continued until 1967. The territory's border with Ethiopia,
marked out in 1897 by France and Emperor Menelik II of Ethiopia, was
later reaffirmed by agreements with Emperor Haile Selassie I of Ethiopia
in 1945 and 1954.

In 1889, a Russian by the name of Nikolay Ivanovitch
Achinov<sup>\[21\]\[22\]</sup> (b. 1856<sup>\[23\]</sup>), arrived with
settlers, infantry and an Orthodox priest to Sagallo on the Gulf of
Tadjoura. The French considered the presence of the Russians as a
violation of their territorial rights and dispatched two gunboats. The
Russians were bombarded and after some loss of life, surrendered. The
colonists were deported to Odessa and the dream of Russian expansion in
East Africa came to an end in less than one year.

Place Menelik, Djibouti, c1905.

The administrative capital was moved from Obock in 1896. The city of
Djibouti, which had a harbor with good access that attracted trade
caravans crossing East Africa, became the new administrative capital.
The Franco-Ethiopian railway, linking Djibouti to the heart of Ethiopia,
began in 1897 and reached Addis Ababa in June 1917, increasing the
volume of trade passing through the port.

### World War II

Main article: French Somaliland in World War II

After the Italian invasion and occupation of Ethiopia in the mid-1930s,
constant border skirmishes occurred between French forces in French
Somaliland and Italian forces in Italian East Africa. In June 1940,
during the early stages of World War II, France fell and the colony was
then ruled by the pro-Axis Vichy (French) government.

British and Commonwealth forces fought the neighboring Italians during
the East African Campaign. In 1941, the Italians were defeated and the
Vichy forces in French Somaliland were isolated. The Vichy French
administration continued to hold out in the colony for over a year after
the Italian collapse. In response, the British blockaded the port of
Djibouti City but it could not prevent local French from providing
information on the passing ship convoys. In 1942, about 4,000 British
troops occupied the city. A local battalion from French Somaliland
participated in the Liberation of Paris in 1944.

### Referendums

In 1958, on the eve of neighboring Somalia's independence in 1960, a
referendum was held in Djibouti to decide whether or not to join the
Somali Republic or to remain with France. The referendum turned out in
favour of a continued association with France, partly due to a combined
yes vote by the sizable Afar ethnic group and resident
Europeans.<sup>\[24\]</sup> There were also reports of widespread vote
rigging, with the French expelling thousands of Somalis before the
referendum reached the polls.<sup>\[25\]</sup> The majority of those who
voted no were Somalis who were strongly in favour of joining a united
Somalia as had been proposed by Mahmoud Harbi, Vice President of the
Government Council. Harbi died in a plane crash two years later under
mysterious circumstances.<sup>\[24\]\[26\]</sup>

In 1960, with the fall of the ruling Dini administration, Ali Aref
Bourhan, a Harbist politician, assumed the seat of Vice President of the
Government Council of French Somaliland, representing the UNI
party.<sup>\[27\]\[28\]</sup> He would hold that position until 1966.

That same year, France rejected the United Nations' recommendation that
it should grant French Somaliland independence. In August, an official
visit to the territory by then French President, General Charles de
Gaulle, was also met with demonstrations and
rioting.<sup>\[29\]\[30\]</sup> In response to the protests, de Gaulle
ordered another referendum.<sup>\[30\]</sup>

On 19 March 1967, a second plebiscite was held to determine the fate of
the territory. Initial results supported a continued but looser
relationship with France. Voting was also divided along ethnic lines,
with the resident Somalis generally voting for independence, with the
goal of eventual reunion with Somalia, and the Afars largely opting to
remain associated with France.<sup>\[29\]</sup> However, the referendum
was again marred by reports of vote rigging on the part of the French
authorities,<sup>\[31\]</sup> with some 10,000 Somalis deported under
the pretext that they did not have valid identity
cards.<sup>\[32\]</sup> According to official figures, although the
territory was at the time inhabited by 58,240 Somali and 48,270 Afar,
only 14,689 Somali were allowed to register to vote versus 22,004
Afar.<sup>\[33\]</sup> Somali representatives also charged that the
French had simultaneously imported thousands of Afar nomads from
neighboring Ethiopia to further tip the odds in their favor, but the
French authorities denied this, suggesting that Afars already greatly
outnumbered Somalis on the voting lists.<sup>\[32\]</sup> Announcement
of the plebiscite results sparked civil unrest, including several
deaths. France also increased its military force along the
frontier.<sup>\[32\]\[34\]</sup>

## French Territory of the Afars and Issas

See also: French Territory of the Afars and Issas

In 1967, shortly after the second referendum was held, the former *Côte
française des Somalis* (French Somaliland) was renamed to *Territoire
français des Afars et des Issas*. This was both in acknowledgement of
the large Afar constituency and to downplay the significance of the
Somali composition (the Issa being a Somali sub-clan).<sup>\[34\]</sup>

The French Territory of Afars and Issas also differed from French
Somaliland in terms of government structure, as the position of governor
changed to that of high commissioner. A nine-member council of
government was also implemented.

With a steadily enlarging Somali population, the likelihood of a third
referendum appearing successful had grown even more dim. The prohibitive
cost of maintaining the colony and the fact that after 1975, France
found itself to be the last remaining colonial power in Africa was
another factor that compelled observers to doubt that the French would
attempt to hold on to the territory.<sup>\[30\]</sup>

In 1976, the French garrison, centered on the 13th Demi-Brigade of the
Foreign Legion (13 DBLE), had to be reinforced to contain Somali
irredentist aspirations, revolting against the French-engineered Afar
domination of the emerging government.<sup>\[35\]</sup> The French
forces were involved in the response to the on 3 February 1976.

On June 27, 1977, a third vote took place. A landslide 98.8% of the
electorate supported disengagement from France, officially marking
Djibouti's independence.<sup>\[30\]\[36\]</sup> Hassan Gouled Aptidon, a
Somali politician who had campaigned for a yes vote in the referendum of
1958, eventually became the nation's first president
(1977–1999).<sup>\[24\]</sup>

After independence the new government signed an agreement calling for a
strong French garrison, though the 13 DBLE was envisaged to be
withdrawn.<sup>\[37\]</sup> While the unit was reduced in size, a full
withdrawal never actually took place.

## Djibouti Republic

In 1981, Aptidon turned the country into a one party state by declaring
that his party, the Rassemblement Populaire pour le Progrès (RPP)
(People's Rally for Progress), was the sole legal one. Clayton writes
that the French garrison played the major role in suppressing further
minor unrest about this time, during which Djibouti became a one-party
state on a much broader ethnic and political basis.<sup>\[38\]</sup>

A civil war broke out in 1991, between the government and a
predominantly Afar rebel group, the Front for the Restoration of Unity
and Democracy (FRUD). The FRUD signed a peace accord with the government
in December 1994, ending the conflict. Two FRUD members were made
cabinet members, and in the presidential elections of 1999 the FRUD
campaigned in support of the RPP.

Aptidon resigned as president 1999, at the age of 83, after being
elected to a fifth term in 1997. His successor was his nephew, Ismail
Omar Guelleh.

On May 12, 2001, President Ismail Omar Guelleh presided over the signing
of what is termed the final peace accord officially ending the
decade-long civil war between the government and the armed faction of
the FRUD, led by Ahmed Dini Ahmed, an Afar nationalist and former Gouled
political ally. The peace accord successfully completed the peace
process begun on February 7, 2000 in Paris. Ahmed Dini Ahmed represented
the FRUD.<sup>\[39\]</sup>

In the presidential election held April 8, 2005, Ismail Omar Guelleh was
re-elected to a second 6-year term at the head of a multi-party
coalition that included the FRUD and other major parties. A loose
coalition of opposition parties again boycotted the election. Currently,
political power is shared by a Somali president and an Afar prime
minister, with an Afar career diplomat as Foreign Minister and other
cabinet posts roughly divided. However, Issas are predominate in the
government, civil service, and the ruling party. That, together with a
shortage of non-government employment, has bred resentment and continued
political competition between the Issa Somalis and the Afars. In March
2006, Djibouti held its first regional elections and began implementing
a decentralization plan. The broad pro-government coalition, including
FRUD candidates, again ran unopposed when the government refused to meet
opposition preconditions for participation. In the 2008 elections, the
opposition Union for a Presidential Majority (UMP) party boycotted the
election, leaving all 65 seats to the ruling RPP. Voter turnout figures
were disputed. Guelleh was re-elected in the 2011 presidential election.

Due to its strategic location at the mouth of the Bab el Mandeb gateway
to the Red Sea and the Suez Canal, Djibouti also hosts various foreign
military bases. Camp Lemonnier is a United States Naval Expeditionary
Base,<sup>\[40\]</sup> situated at Djibouti-Ambouli International
Airport and home to the Combined Joint Task Force - Horn of Africa
(CJTF-HOA) of the U.S. Africa Command (USAFRICOM).<sup>\[41\]</sup> In
2011, Japan also opened a local naval base staffed by 180 personnel to
assist in marine defense. This initiative is expected to generate \$30
million in revenue for the Djiboutian government.<sup>\[42\]</sup>

## Major Social Struggles

- 1998: Gabode Prison Hunger Strike
- 2011: Djiboutian Protests (part of the [Arab
  Spring](Arab_Spring.md "wikilink"))

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink") [Category:Eastern
Africa](Category:Eastern_Africa.md "wikilink")
[Category:Africa](Category:Africa.md "wikilink")
[Category:Djibouti](Category:Djibouti.md "wikilink")
[Category:States](Category:States.md "wikilink") [Category:Authortarian
States](Category:Authortarian_States.md "wikilink")