---
title: Dublin McDonald's Strike (1979)
permalink: /Dublin_McDonald's_Strike_(1979)/
---

The **Dublin McDonald's Strike of 1979** was a
[strike](List_of_Strikes "wikilink") in two McDonald's in
[Ireland](Ireland "wikilink") in
[1979](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Northern_Europe "wikilink")
with two demands: union recognition and an end to low pay.

## Background

McDonald's had just opened up two shops in Dublin, Ireland and had paid
people 85p an hour, a very low rate even for the catering industry.
After the workers there joined the [Irish Transport and General Workers'
Union](Irish_Transport_and_General_Workers'_Union "wikilink") (ITGWU)
management refused to recognise the union or even to talk over the phone
to the union officials. Eventually, the enraged workers launched a
strike on the 16th of March.

## Events

McDonald's instantly raised the hourly wage to £1 and offered free chips
to anyone who would eat at the McDonald's (and thus crossing the picket
line). Despite two strikers being arrested, morale remained high until
McDonald's went to court and picketing was heavily restricted. Only
three people at any one time and not at all during the last hour of
business. Three strikers, Jimmy Mackin, Noel Boyle and Sean Mrozek, were
ordered not to picket at all. Noel Boyle and Jimmy Mackin continued to
picket and the union abandoned any hope of winning the strike. The
strikers organised a march with 1,000 sympathisers, but the union
wouldn't attend meeting or aid the strike.

McDonald’s could have been closed if their supplies had been stopped.
Dockers and airport workers refused to handle the scab food. Then the
supplies started to come in through the North. The union knew that this
food was being stored in the Superdine warehouse outside Naas but
wouldn’t even put a picket on the place. In short they made no real
attempt to stop the scab supplies getting in. The union officials even
went so far as to give a list of ‘approved’ picketers to the Gardai
[\[police]([police "wikilink")\] and to the boss. Leading to police
harassing strikers by visiting them at their home. Luckily, other ITGWU
members joined the picket, raised awareness and donated money as did
socialist organisations, other unions and student groups.

## Results

The strike led to a wage increase to £1.15p an hour, but the working
week was cut by 5 hours making the increase almost worthless. Howevere
the union was recognised despite union leadership openly despising the
strikers, and the union won no further improvements for the workers at
McDonald's.

## References

[The Dublin McDonald's strike,
1979](https://libcom.org/history/dublin-mcdonalds-strike-1979) at
[libcom.org](libcom.org "wikilink")

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Strikes](Category:Strikes "wikilink")
[Category:Ireland](Category:Ireland "wikilink") [Category:Northern
Europe](Category:Northern_Europe "wikilink")
[Category:Europe](Category:Europe "wikilink")
[Category:1979](Category:1979 "wikilink")
[Category:1970s](Category:1970s "wikilink") [Category:20th
Century](Category:20th_Century "wikilink")