---
title: Egyptian Uprising (1968)
permalink: /Egyptian_Uprising_(1968)/
---

The **Egyptian Uprising of 1968** was an uprising of workers and
students in Egypt in 1968 for calls for political, military and
educational reform.

## Background

In Egypt, in the early 1950s, a [military
coup](Egyptian_Revolution_(1952) "wikilink") had displaced the British
puppet king and led to the establishment of a regime under [Gamal Abdel
Nasser](Gamal_Abdel_Nasser "wikilink"), which, while ‘speaking for the
people’ (the peasants and workers) was hostile not only to the feudal
landowners but also to any political opposition or any attempt to create
independent trade unions to represent the working class directly.
Egypt’s defeat by Israel in June 1967 led to a political as well as a
military crisis and Nasser’s resignation as president. He returned after
massive popular demonstrations in his support. But his credentials were
damaged.

## Events

### Febuary

In February 1968, students and workers launched protests calling for
political reforms. The first move was made by steel workers in Helwan
(to the south of Cairo) protesting the military court’s lenient ruling
in the case of the military aviation officers accused of negligence
during the June war. They were joined on 21 February – which is Egyptian
Student Day – by up to 100,000 students from major universities in Cairo
and Alexandria. The Cairo uprising alone resulted in the death of two
workers and the wounding of 77 citizens, as well as 146 police officers.
Some 635 people were also arrested, and some vehicles and buildings were
destroyed in the capital. The protest obliged Nasser to give a major
speech in response, which, in the light of the June 1967 defeat, was
exceptionally conciliatory. Seen by some as the most significant public
challenge to is regime since workers’ protests in March 1954, this
popular movement forced Nasser to issue a manifesto promising the
restoration of civil liberties, greater parliamentary independence from
the executive, major structural changes, and a campaign to rid the
government of corrupt elements. A public referendum approved the
proposed measures in May 1968, and elections were held for the Supreme
Executive Committee. Hailed at the time as signaling an important shift
from political repression to liberalization, the manifesto and the
promised measures would largely remain unfulfilled.

Further student unrest broke out in November 1968 following the
announcement of a new education law. The uprising began with protests by
high school students in the city of Mansoura. They were joined by
university students and others, including peasants, and the next day,
demonstrations resulted in clashes with the security forces which led to
the death of three students and a farmer as well as the wounding of 32
protesters, nine police officers and 14 soldiers. News of the events in
Mansoura reached Alexandria University, where leaders of the student
movement from the engineering faculty launched massive protests and
clashed with police forces, in which some 53 policemen and 30 students
were injured.

The head of the Faculty of Engineering Student Union, Atef Al-Shater,
and three of his colleagues were arrested. The governor of Alexandria
tried to convince the students not to escalate the situation, but they
held him inside the faculty and did not allow him to leave until
Al-Shater and his colleagues were released. The national assembly
discussed the problem of the new law the day after the governor of
Alexandria was detained. On 25 November there was a strike by workers in
Alexandria as well as large-scale demonstrations which ended in clashes
with the police, resulting in 16 deaths.

Fifty public buses were smashed, along with 270 tram windshields, 116
traffic lights, 29 stalls, 11 shop windows and a number of other public
transport and private vehicles and lampposts. A sit-in staged by the
Faculty of Engineering ended without achieving any significant results
because of the lack of food during the days of Ramadan and power outages
suffered by the protestors, as well as the withdrawal of the union
leader from the sit-in and the governor’s threat to evacuate the
building by force. Those who were arrested during the sit-in were
transferred to the courts for trial, but ultimately, no trials were
held. After three months of being detained, the students were released
but their leaders were sent for military service.

## References

[Africa’s 1968: Protests and Uprisings Across the
Continent](http://roape.net/2018/05/31/africas-1968-protests-and-uprisings-across-the-continent/)