---
title: El Salvador
permalink: /El_Salvador/
---

**El Salvador** is a capitalist [state](List_of_States "wikilink") in
Central America, bordering [Guatemala](Guatemala "wikilink").

## Historic Libertarian Socialism

Libertarian socialist ideas are first known to have entered El Salvador
from French anarchist [Anselme
Bellegarrigue](Anselme_Bellegarrigue "wikilink"), who fled persecution
from French authorities into El Salvador in the 1860s. The first known
Salvadoran libertarian socialist was lawyer [Enrique
Cordova](Enrique_Cordova "wikilink"), who published anarchist writing as
early as 1904.

As early as 1908, [anarcho-syndicalist](Anarcho-Syndicalism "wikilink")
tendencies among Salvadoran workers developed, with newspapers
experessing anarcho-syndicalist perspectives developing.
Anarcho-syndicalists helped organised many of the first trade unions in
the country. However, the movement largely dissipated as
[Marxist-Leninist](Marxist-Leninism "wikilink") influence over the
socialist movement grew and military repression killed many anarchists
or forced them into hiding.

In the 1970s, some anarchists fought with other socialist guerillas
against the government in the Salvadoran Civil War, but they did not
play a major role. Since the end of the civil war and development of
liberal democracy in El Salvador, a growing libertarian socialist
movement has emerged since the 2000s, with the rise of several small
groups and even a small newspaper.[^1]

<references />

[^1]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") -
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anarchism_in_El_Salvador>