---
title: Emma Goldman
permalink: /Emma_Goldman/
---

**Emma Goldman**(1869 - 1940) was a legendary
[anarchist](Anarchism "wikilink"),
[feminist](Anarcha-Feminism "wikilink"), writer and activist. Her
writing and lectures spanned a wide variety of issues, including
prisons, atheism, freedom of speech, militarism,
[capitalism](capitalism "wikilink"), marriage, free love, and
homosexuality.

## Life

### Family

Emma Goldman was born into an Orthodox Jewish family in Kovno in the
Russian Empire, which is now known as Kaunas in Lithuania. Goldman's
mother Taube Bienowitch had been married before to a man with whom she
had two daughters—Helena in 1860 and Lena in 1862. When her first
husband died of tuberculosis, Taube was devastated. Goldman later wrote:
"Whatever love she had had died with the young man to whom she had been
married at the age of fifteen."

Taube's second marriage was arranged by her family and, as Goldman puts
it, "mismated from the first". Her second husband, Abraham Goldman,
invested Taube's inheritance in a business that quickly failed. The
ensuing hardship, combined with the emotional distance of husband and
wife, made the household a tense place for the children. When Taube
became pregnant, Abraham hoped desperately for a son; a daughter, he
believed, would be one more sign of failure. They eventually had three
sons, but their first child was Emma.

Emma Goldman was born on June 27, 1869. Her father used violence to
punish his children, beating them when they disobeyed him. He used a
whip on Emma, the most rebellious of them. Her mother provided scarce
comfort, rarely calling on Abraham to tone down his beatings. Goldman
later speculated that her father's furious temper was at least partly a
result of sexual frustration.

Goldman's relationships with her elder half-sisters, Helena and Lena,
were a study in contrasts. Helena, the oldest, provided the comfort the
children lacked from their mother; she filled Goldman's childhood with
"whatever joy it had". Lena, however, was distant and uncharitable. The
three sisters were joined by brothers Louis (who died at the age of
six), Herman (born in 1872), and Moishe (born in 1879).

### Adolescence

When Emma was a young girl, the Goldman family moved to the village of
Papilė, where her father ran an inn. While her sisters worked, she
became friends with a servant named Petrushka, who excited her "first
erotic sensations". Later in Papilė she witnessed a peasant being
whipped with a knout in the street. This event traumatized her and
contributed to her lifelong distaste for violent authority.

At the age of seven, Goldman moved with her family to the Prussian city
of Königsberg (then part of the German Empire), and she was enrolled in
a *Realschule*. One teacher punished disobedient students—targeting
Goldman in particular—by beating their hands with a ruler. Another
teacher tried to molest his female students and was fired when Goldman
fought back. She found a sympathetic mentor in her German-language
teacher, who loaned her books and took her to an opera. A passionate
student, Goldman passed the exam for admission into a gymnasium, but her
religion teacher refused to provide a certificate of good behavior and
she was unable to attend.

The family moved to the Russian capital of Saint Petersburg, where her
father opened one unsuccessful store after another. Their poverty forced
the children to work, and Goldman took an assortment of jobs, including
one in a corset shop. As a teenager Goldman begged her father to allow
her to return to school, but instead he threw her French book into the
fire and shouted: "Girls do not have to learn much! All a Jewish
daughter needs to know is how to prepare gefilte fish, cut noodles fine,
and give the man plenty of children."

Goldman pursued an independent education on her own, however, and soon
began to study the political turmoil around her, particularly the
Nihilists responsible for assassinating Alexander II of Russia. The
ensuing turmoil intrigued Goldman, although she did not fully understand
it at the time. When she read Nikolai Chernyshevsky's novel, *What Is to
Be Done?* (1863), she found a role model in the protagonist Vera. She
adopts a Nihilist philosophy and escapes her repressive family to live
freely and organize a sewing cooperative. The book enthralled Goldman
and remained a source of inspiration throughout her life.

Her father, meanwhile, continued to insist on a domestic future for her,
and he tried to arrange for her to be married at the age of fifteen.
They fought about the issue constantly; he complained that she was
becoming a "loose" woman, and she insisted that she would marry for love
alone. At the corset shop, she was forced to fend off unwelcome advances
from Russian officers and other men. One persistent suitor took her into
a hotel room and committed what Goldman described as "violent contact";
two biographers call it rape. She was stunned by the experience,
overcome by "shock at the discovery that the contact between man and
woman could be so brutal and painful." Goldman felt that the encounter
forever soured her interactions with men.

### Rochester, New York

In 1885, her sister Helena made plans to move to New York in the United
States to join her sister Lena and her husband. Goldman wanted to join
her sister, but their father refused to allow it. Despite Helena's offer
to pay for the trip, Abraham turned a deaf ear to their pleas.
Desperate, Goldman threatened to throw herself into the Neva River if
she could not go. Their father finally agreed. On December 29, 1885,
Helena and Emma arrived at New York City's Castle Garden, the entry for
immigrants.

They settled upstate, living in the Rochester home which Lena had made
with her husband Samuel. Fleeing the rising antisemitism of Saint
Petersburg, their parents and brothers joined them a year later. Goldman
began working as a seamstress, sewing overcoats for more than ten hours
a day, earning two and a half dollars a week. She asked for a raise and
was denied; she quit and took work at a smaller shop nearby.

At her new job, Goldman met a fellow worker named Jacob Kershner, who
shared her love for books, dancing, and traveling, as well as her
frustration with the monotony of factory work. After four months, they
married in February 1887. Once he moved in with Goldman's family,
however, their relationship faltered. On their wedding night she
discovered that he was impotent; they became emotionally and physically
distant. Before long he became jealous and suspicious. She, meanwhile,
was becoming more engaged with the political turmoil around
her—particularly the aftermath of executions related to the 1886
Haymarket affair in Chicago and the anti-authoritarian political
philosophy of anarchism.

Less than a year after the wedding, the couple were divorced; Kershner
begged Goldman to return and threatened to poison himself if she did
not. They reunited, but after three months she left once again. Her
parents considered her behavior "loose" and refused to allow Goldman
into their home. Carrying her sewing machine in one hand and a bag with
five dollars in the other, she left Rochester and headed southeast to
New York City.

### Most and Berkman

On her first day in the city, Goldman met two men who greatly changed
her life. At Sachs's Café, a gathering place for radicals, she was
introduced to Alexander Berkman, an anarchist who invited her to a
public speech that evening. They went to hear Johann Most, editor of a
radical publication called *Freiheit* and an advocate of "propaganda of
the deed"—the use of violence to instigate change. She was impressed by
his fiery oration, and Most took her under his wing, training her in
methods of public speaking. He encouraged her vigorously, telling her
that she was "to take my place when I am gone." One of her first public
talks in support of "the Cause" was in Rochester. After convincing
Helena not to tell their parents of her speech, Goldman found her mind a
blank once on stage. She later wrote, suddenly:

Excited by the experience, Goldman refined her public persona during
subsequent engagements. Quickly, however, she found herself arguing with
Most over her independence. After a momentous speech in Cleveland, she
felt as though she had become "a parrot repeating Most's
views"<sup>\[32\]</sup> and resolved to express herself on the stage.
When she returned to New York, Most became furious and told her: "Who is
not with me is against me!"<sup>\[33\]</sup> She left *Freiheit* and
joined another publication, *Die Autonomie*.<sup>\[34\]</sup>

Meanwhile, Goldman had begun a friendship with Berkman, whom she
affectionately called Sasha. Before long they became lovers and moved
into a communal apartment with his cousin Modest "Fedya" Stein and
Goldman's friend, Helen Minkin, on 42nd Street.<sup>\[35\]</sup>
Although their relationship had numerous difficulties, Goldman and
Berkman would share a close bond for decades, united by their anarchist
principles and commitment to personal equality.<sup>\[36\]</sup>

Site of the ice cream shop in Worcester, Massachusetts operated by
Goldman, Berkman and Stein, photographed in 2017

In 1892, Goldman joined with Berkman and Stein in opening an ice cream
shop in Worcester, Massachusetts. After a few months of operating the
shop, however, Goldman and Berkman were diverted by becoming involved in
the Homestead Strike in western Pennsylvania near
Pittsburgh.<sup>\[37\]\[38\]</sup>

### Homestead plot

Further information: Homestead Strike

Berkman and Goldman came together through the Homestead Strike. In June
1892, a steel plant in Homestead, Pennsylvania owned by Andrew Carnegie
became the focus of national attention when talks between the Carnegie
Steel Company and the Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel Workers
(AA) broke down. The factory's manager was Henry Clay Frick, a fierce
opponent of the union. When a final round of talks failed at the end of
June, management closed the plant and locked out the workers, who
immediately went on strike. Strikebreakers were brought in and the
company hired Pinkerton guards to protect them. On July 6, a fight broke
out between 300 Pinkerton guards and a crowd of armed union workers.
During the twelve-hour gunfight, seven guards and nine strikers were
killed.<sup>\[39\]</sup>

Goldman and Berkman believed that a retaliatory assassination of
Carnegie Steel Company manager Henry Clay Frick (*pictured*) would
"strike terror into the soul of his class" and "bring the teachings of
Anarchism before the world".<sup>\[40\]</sup>

When a majority of the nation's newspapers expressed support of the
strikers, Goldman and Berkman resolved to assassinate Frick, an action
they expected would inspire the workers to revolt against the capitalist
system. Berkman chose to carry out the assassination, and ordered
Goldman to stay behind in order to explain his motives after he went to
jail. He would be in charge of "the deed"; she of the associated
propaganda.<sup>\[41\]</sup> Berkman tried and failed to make a bomb,
then set off for Pittsburgh to buy a gun and a suit of decent clothes.

Goldman, meanwhile, decided to help fund the scheme through
prostitution. Remembering the character of Sonya in Fyodor Dostoevsky's
novel *Crime and Punishment* (1866), she mused: "She had become a
prostitute in order to support her little brothers and
sisters...Sensitive Sonya could sell her body; why not
I?"<sup>\[42\]</sup> Once on the street, Goldman caught the eye of a man
who took her into a saloon, bought her a beer, gave her ten dollars,
informed her she did not have "the knack," and told her to quit the
business. She was "too astounded for speech".<sup>\[42\]</sup> She wrote
to Helena, claiming illness, and asked her for fifteen
dollars.<sup>\[43\]</sup>

On July 23, Berkman gained access to Frick's office while carrying a
concealed handgun; he shot Frick three times, and stabbed him in the
leg. A group of workers—far from joining in his *attentat*—beat Berkman
unconscious, and he was carried away by the police.<sup>\[44\]</sup>
Berkman was convicted of attempted murder<sup>\[45\]</sup> and sentenced
to 22 years in prison.<sup>\[46\]</sup> Goldman suffered during his long
absence.<sup>\[47\]</sup>

Convinced Goldman was involved in the plot, police raided her apartment.
Although they found no evidence, they pressured her landlord into
evicting her. Worse, the *attentat* had failed to rouse the masses:
workers and anarchists alike condemned Berkman's action. Johann Most,
their former mentor, lashed out at Berkman and the assassination
attempt. Furious at these attacks, Goldman brought a toy horsewhip to a
public lecture and demanded, onstage, that Most explain his betrayal. He
dismissed her, whereupon she struck him with the whip, broke it on her
knee, and hurled the pieces at him.<sup>\[48\]\[49\]</sup> She later
regretted her assault, confiding to a friend: "At the age of
twenty-three, one does not reason."<sup>\[50\]</sup>

### "Inciting to riot"

When the Panic of 1893 struck in the following year, the United States
suffered one of its worst economic crises. By year's end, the
unemployment rate was higher than 20%,<sup>\[51\]</sup> and "hunger
demonstrations" sometimes gave way to riots. Goldman began speaking to
crowds of frustrated men and women in New York City. On August 21, she
spoke to a crowd of nearly 3,000 people in Union Square, where she
encouraged unemployed workers to take immediate action. Her exact words
are unclear: undercover agents insist she ordered the crowd to "take
everything ... by force".<sup>\[52\]</sup> But Goldman later recounted
this message: "Well then, demonstrate before the palaces of the rich;
demand work. If they do not give you work, demand bread. If they deny
you both, take bread."<sup>\[53\]</sup> Later in court,
Detective-Sergeant Charles Jacobs offered yet another version of her
speech.<sup>\[54\]</sup>

Goldman (shown here in Union Square, New York in 1916) urged unemployed
workers to take direct action rather than depend on charity or
government aid.

A week later Goldman was arrested in Philadelphia and returned to New
York City for trial, charged with "inciting to riot".<sup>\[55\]</sup>
During the train ride, Jacobs offered to drop the charges against her if
she would inform on other radicals in the area. She responded by
throwing a glass of ice water in his face.<sup>\[56\]</sup> As she
awaited trial, Goldman was visited by Nellie Bly, a reporter for the
*New York World.* She spent two hours talking to Goldman, and wrote a
positive article about the woman she described as a "modern Joan of
Arc."<sup>\[57\]</sup>

Despite this positive publicity, the jury was persuaded by Jacobs'
testimony and frightened by Goldman's politics. The assistant District
Attorney questioned Goldman about her anarchism, as well as her atheism;
the judge spoke of her as "a dangerous woman".<sup>\[58\]</sup> She was
sentenced to one year in the Blackwell's Island Penitentiary. Once
inside she suffered an attack of rheumatism and was sent to the
infirmary; there she befriended a visiting doctor and began studying
medicine. She also read dozens of books, including works by the American
activist-writers Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau; novelist
Nathaniel Hawthorne; poet Walt Whitman, and philosopher John Stuart
Mill.<sup>\[59\]</sup> When Goldman was released after ten months, a
raucous crowd of nearly 3,000 people greeted her at the Thalia Theater
in New York City. She soon became swamped with requests for interviews
and lectures.<sup>\[60\]</sup>

To make money, Goldman decided to pursue the medical work she had
studied in prison. However, her preferred fields of
specialization—midwifery and massage—were not available to nursing
students in the US. She sailed to Europe, lecturing in London, Glasgow,
and Edinburgh. She met with renowned anarchists such as Errico
Malatesta, Louise Michel, and Peter Kropotkin. In Vienna, she received
two diplomas for midwifery and put them immediately to use back in the
US.

Alternating between lectures and midwifery, Goldman conducted the first
cross-country tour by an anarchist speaker. In November 1899 she
returned to Europe to speak, where she met the Czech anarchist Hippolyte
Havel in London. They went together to France and helped organize the
1900 International Anarchist Congress on the outskirts of
Paris.<sup>\[61\]</sup> Afterward Havel immigrated to the United States,
traveling with her to Chicago. They shared a residence there with
friends of Goldman.

### McKinley assassination

Further information: Assassination of William McKinley

Leon Czolgosz insisted that Goldman had not guided his plan to
assassinate US President William McKinley, but she was arrested and held
for two weeks.

On September 6, 1901, Leon Czolgosz, an unemployed factory worker and
registered Republican with a history of mental illness, shot US
President William McKinley twice during a public speaking event in
Buffalo, New York. McKinley was hit in the breastbone and stomach, and
died eight days later.<sup>\[62\]</sup> Czolgosz was arrested, and
interrogated around the clock. During interrogation he claimed to be an
anarchist and said he had been inspired to act after attending a speech
by Goldman. The authorities used this as a pretext to charge Goldman
with planning McKinley's assassination. They tracked her to a residence
in Chicago she shared with Hippolyte Havel, who had come to the US; as
well as with Mary and Abe Isaak, an anarchist couple and their
family.<sup>\[63\]\[64\]</sup> Goldman was arrested, along with Isaak,
Havel, and ten other anarchists.<sup>\[65\]</sup>

Propaganda published in the *Chicago Daily Tribune*, September 8, 1901,
blaming Emma Goldman for inspiring Leon Czolgosz to assassinate
President William McKinley.

Earlier, Czolgosz had tried but failed to become friends with Goldman
and her companions. During a talk in Cleveland, Czolgosz had approached
Goldman and asked her advice on which books he should read. In July
1901, he had appeared at the Isaak house, asking a series of unusual
questions. They assumed he was an infiltrator, like a number of police
agents sent to spy on radical groups. They had remained distant from
him, and Abe Isaak sent a notice to associates warning of "another
spy".<sup>\[66\]</sup>

Although Czolgosz repeatedly denied Goldman's involvement, the police
held her in close custody, subjecting her to what she called the "third
degree".<sup>\[67\]</sup> She explained her housemates' distrust of
Czolgosz, and the police finally recognized that she had not had any
significant contact with the attacker. No evidence was found linking
Goldman to the attack, and she was released after two weeks of
detention. Before McKinley died, Goldman offered to provide nursing
care, referring to him as "merely a human being".<sup>\[68\]</sup>
Czolgosz, despite considerable evidence of mental illness, was convicted
of murder and executed.<sup>\[69\]</sup>

Throughout her detention and after her release, Goldman steadfastly
refused to condemn Czolgosz's actions, standing virtually alone in doing
so. Friends and supporters—including Berkman—urged her to quit his
cause. But Goldman defended Czolgosz as a "supersensitive
being"<sup>\[70\]</sup> and chastised other anarchists for abandoning
him.<sup>\[70\]</sup> She was vilified in the press as the "high
priestess of anarchy",<sup>\[71\]</sup> while many newspapers declared
the anarchist movement responsible for the murder.<sup>\[72\]</sup> In
the wake of these events, socialism gained support over anarchism among
US radicals. McKinley's successor, Theodore Roosevelt, declared his
intent to crack down "not only against anarchists, but against all
active and passive sympathizers with anarchists".<sup>\[73\]</sup>

### *Mother Earth* and Berkman's release

Mug shot taken in 1901 when Goldman was implicated in the assassination
of President McKinley.

Main article: Mother Earth (magazine)

After Czolgosz was executed, Goldman withdrew from the world. Scorned by
her fellow anarchists, vilified by the press, and separated from her
love, Berkman, she retreated into anonymity and nursing. "It was bitter
and hard to face life anew," she wrote later.<sup>\[74\]</sup>

Using the name E. G. Smith, she left public life and took on a series of
private nursing jobs.<sup>\[75\]</sup> When the US Congress passed the
Anarchist Exclusion Act (1903), however, a new wave of activism rose to
oppose it, and Goldman was pulled back into the movement. A coalition of
people and organizations across the left end of the political spectrum
opposed the law on grounds that it violated freedom of speech, and she
had the nation's ear once again.

After an English anarchist named John Turner was arrested under the
Anarchist Exclusion Act and threatened with deportation, Goldman joined
forces with the Free Speech League to champion his
cause.<sup>\[76\]</sup> The league enlisted the aid of noted attorneys
Clarence Darrow and Edgar Lee Masters, who took Turner's case to the US
Supreme Court. Although Turner and the League lost, Goldman considered
it a victory of propaganda.<sup>\[77\]</sup> She had returned to
anarchist activism, but it was taking its toll on her. "I never felt so
weighed down," she wrote to Berkman. "I fear I am forever doomed to
remain public property and to have my life worn out through the care for
the lives of others."<sup>\[78\]</sup>

Goldman's *Mother Earth* magazine became a home to radical activists and
literary free thinkers around the US.

In 1906, Goldman decided to start a publication, "a place of expression
for the young idealists in arts and letters".<sup>\[79\]</sup> *Mother
Earth* was staffed by a cadre of radical activists, including Hippolyte
Havel, Max Baginski, and Leonard Abbott. In addition to publishing
original works by its editors and anarchists around the world, *Mother
Earth* reprinted selections from a variety of writers. These included
the French philosopher Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, Russian anarchist Peter
Kropotkin, German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche, and British writer
Mary Wollstonecraft. Goldman wrote frequently about anarchism, politics,
labor issues, atheism, sexuality, and feminism, and was the first editor
of the magazine.<sup>\[80\]\[81\]</sup>

On May 18 of the same year, Alexander Berkman was released from prison.
Carrying a bouquet of roses, Goldman met him on the train platform and
found herself "seized by terror and pity"<sup>\[82\]</sup> as she beheld
his gaunt, pale form. Neither was able to speak; they returned to her
home in silence. For weeks, he struggled to readjust to life on the
outside. An abortive speaking tour ended in failure, and in Cleveland he
purchased a revolver with the intent of killing
himself.<sup>\[83\]\[84\]</sup> He returned to New York, however, and
learned that Goldman had been arrested with a group of activists meeting
to reflect on Czolgosz. Invigorated anew by this violation of freedom of
assembly, he declared, "My resurrection has come!"<sup>\[85\]</sup> and
set about securing their release.<sup>\[86\]</sup>

Berkman took the helm of *Mother Earth* in 1907, while Goldman toured
the country to raise funds to keep it operating. Editing the magazine
was a revitalizing experience for Berkman. But his relationship with
Goldman faltered, and he had an affair with a 15-year-old anarchist
named Becky Edelsohn. Goldman was pained by his rejection of her, but
considered it a consequence of his prison experience.<sup>\[87\]</sup>
Later that year she served as a delegate from the US to the
International Anarchist Congress of Amsterdam. Anarchists and
syndicalists from around the world gathered to sort out the tension
between the two ideologies, but no decisive agreement was reached.
Goldman returned to the US and continued speaking to large
audiences.<sup>\[88\]</sup>

### Reitman, essays, and birth control

For the next ten years, Goldman traveled around the country nonstop,
delivering lectures and agitating for anarchism. The coalitions formed
in opposition to the Anarchist Exclusion Act had given her an
appreciation for reaching out to those of other political positions.
When the US Justice Department sent spies to observe, they reported the
meetings as "packed".<sup>\[89\]</sup> Writers, journalists, artists,
judges, and workers from across the spectrum spoke of her "magnetic
power", her "convincing presence", her "force, eloquence, and
fire".<sup>\[90\]</sup>

Goldman in 1908, sketched by Marguerite Martyn

Goldman joined Margaret Sanger in crusading for women's access to birth
control; both women were arrested for violating the Comstock Law.

In the spring of 1908, Goldman met and fell in love with Ben Reitman,
the so-called "Hobo doctor." Having grown up in Chicago's Tenderloin
District, Reitman spent several years as a drifter before earning a
medical degree from the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Chicago.
As a doctor, he treated people suffering from poverty and illness,
particularly venereal diseases. He and Goldman began an affair. They
shared a commitment to free love and Reitman took a variety of lovers,
but Goldman did not. She tried to reconcile her feelings of jealousy
with a belief in freedom of the heart, but found it
difficult.<sup>\[91\]</sup>

Two years later, Goldman began feeling frustrated with lecture
audiences. She yearned to "reach the few who really want to learn,
rather than the many who come to be amused".<sup>\[92\]</sup> She
collected a series of speeches and items she had written for *Mother
Earth* and published a book titled *Anarchism and Other Essays.*
Covering a wide variety of topics, Goldman tried to represent "the
mental and soul struggles of twenty-one years".<sup>\[92\]</sup> In
addition to a comprehensive look at anarchism and its criticisms, the
book includes essays on patriotism, women's suffrage, marriage, and
prisons.

When Margaret Sanger, an advocate of access to contraception, coined the
term "birth control" and disseminated information about various methods
in the June 1914 issue of her magazine *The Woman Rebel,* she received
aggressive support from Goldman. The latter had already been active in
efforts to increase birth control access for several years. In 1916,
Goldman was arrested for giving lessons in public on how to use
contraceptives.<sup>\[93\]</sup> Sanger, too, was arrested under the
Comstock Law, which prohibited the dissemination of "obscene, lewd, or
lascivious articles",<sup>\[94\]</sup> which authorities defined as
including information relating to birth control.

Although they later split from Sanger over charges of insufficient
support, Goldman and Reitman distributed copies of Sanger's pamphlet
*Family Limitation* (along with a similar essay of Reitman's). In 1915
Goldman conducted a nationwide speaking tour, in part to raise awareness
about contraception options. Although the nation's attitude toward the
topic seemed to be liberalizing, Goldman was arrested on February 11,
1916, as she was about to give another public lecture.<sup>\[95\]</sup>
Goldman was charged with violating the Comstock Law. Refusing to pay a
\$100 fine, Goldman spent two weeks in a prison workhouse, which she saw
as an "opportunity" to reconnect with those rejected by
society.<sup>\[96\]</sup>

### World War I

Although US President Woodrow Wilson was re-elected in 1916 under the
slogan "He kept us out of the war", at the start of his second term, he
announced that Germany's continued deployment of unrestricted submarine
warfare was sufficient cause for the US to enter the Great War. Shortly
afterward, Congress passed the Selective Service Act of 1917, which
required all males aged 21–30 to register for military conscription.
Goldman saw the decision as an exercise in militarist aggression, driven
by capitalism. She declared in *Mother Earth* her intent to resist
conscription, and to oppose US involvement in the war.<sup>\[97\]</sup>

Goldman on a streetcar in 1917, perhaps during a strike or
demonstration.

To this end, she and Berkman organized the No Conscription League of New
York, which proclaimed: "We oppose conscription because we are
internationalists, antimilitarists, and opposed to all wars waged by
capitalistic governments."<sup>\[98\]</sup> The group became a vanguard
for anti-draft activism, and chapters began to appear in other cities.
When police began raiding the group's public events to find young men
who had not registered for the draft, however, Goldman and others
focused their efforts on distributing pamphlets and other
writings.<sup>\[99\]</sup> In the midst of the nation's patriotic
fervor, many elements of the political left refused to support the
League's efforts. The Women's Peace Party, for example, ceased its
opposition to the war once the US entered it. The Socialist Party of
America took an official stance against US involvement, but supported
Wilson in most of his activities.<sup>\[100\]</sup>

On June 15, 1917, Goldman and Berkman were arrested during a raid of
their offices, in which authorities seized "a wagon load of anarchist
records and propaganda".<sup>\[101\]</sup> *The New York Times* reported
that Goldman asked to change into a more appropriate outfit, and emerged
in a gown of "royal purple".<sup>\[101\]\[102\]</sup> The pair were
charged with conspiracy to "induce persons not to
register"<sup>\[103\]</sup> under the newly enacted Espionage
Act,<sup>\[104\]</sup> and were held on US\$25,000 bail each. Defending
herself and Berkman during their trial, Goldman invoked the First
Amendment, asking how the government could claim to fight for democracy
abroad while suppressing free speech at home:

<sup>\[105\]</sup>

The jury found Goldman and Berkman guilty. Judge Julius Marshuetz Mayer
imposed the maximum sentence: two years' imprisonment, a \$10,000 fine
each, and the possibility of deportation after their release from
prison. As she was transported to Missouri State Penitentiary, Goldman
wrote to a friend: "Two years imprisonment for having made an
uncompromising stand for one's ideal. Why that is a small
price."<sup>\[106\]</sup>

In prison, she was assigned to work as a seamstress, under the eye of a
"miserable gutter-snipe of a 21-year-old boy paid to get
results".<sup>\[107\]</sup> She met the socialist Kate Richards O'Hare,
who had also been imprisoned under the Espionage Act. Although they
differed on political strategy— O'Hare believed in voting to achieve
state power—the two women came together to agitate for better conditions
among prisoners.<sup>\[108\]</sup> Goldman also met and became friends
with Gabriella Segata Antolini, an anarchist and follower of Luigi
Galleani. Antolini had been arrested transporting a satchel filled with
dynamite on a Chicago-bound train. She had refused to cooperate with
authorities, and was sent to prison for 14 months. Working together to
make life better for the other inmates, the three women became known as
"The Trinity". Goldman was released on September 27,
1919.<sup>\[109\]</sup>

### Deportation

Emma Goldman's deportation photo, 1919

Goldman and Berkman were released from prison during the United States'
Red Scare of 1919–20, when public anxiety about wartime pro-German
activities had expanded into a pervasive fear of Bolshevism and the
prospect of an imminent radical revolution. It was a time of social
unrest due to union organizing strikes and actions by activist
immigrants. Attorney General Alexander Mitchell Palmer and J. Edgar
Hoover, head of the US Department of Justice's General Intelligence
Division (now the FBI), were intent on using the Anarchist Exclusion Act
and its 1918 expansion to deport any non-citizens they could identify as
advocates of anarchy or revolution. "Emma Goldman and Alexander
Berkman," Hoover wrote while they were in prison, "are, beyond doubt,
two of the most dangerous anarchists in this country and return to the
community will result in undue harm."<sup>\[110\]</sup>

At her deportation hearing on October 27, Goldman refused to answer
questions about her beliefs, on the grounds that her American
citizenship invalidated any attempt to deport her under the Anarchist
Exclusion Act, which could be enforced only against non-citizens of the
US. She presented a written statement instead: "Today so-called aliens
are deported. Tomorrow native Americans will be banished. Already some
patrioteers are suggesting that native American sons to whom democracy
is a sacred ideal should be exiled."<sup>\[111\]</sup> Louis Post at the
Department of Labor, which had ultimate authority over deportation
decisions, determined that the revocation of her husband Kershner's
American citizenship in 1908 after his conviction had revoked hers as
well. After initially promising a court fight,<sup>\[112\]</sup> Goldman
decided not to appeal his ruling.<sup>\[113\]</sup>

The Labor Department included Goldman and Berkman among 249 aliens it
deported *en masse,* mostly people with only vague associations with
radical groups, who had been swept up in government raids in
November.<sup>\[114\]</sup> *Buford*, a ship the press nicknamed the
"Soviet Ark," sailed from the Army's New York Port of Embarkation on
December 21.<sup>\[115\]\[116\]</sup> Some 58 enlisted men and four
officers provided security on the journey, and pistols were distributed
to the crew.<sup>\[115\]\[117\]</sup> Most of the press approved
enthusiastically. The Cleveland *Plain Dealer* wrote: "It is hoped and
expected that other vessels, larger, more commodious, carrying similar
cargoes, will follow in her wake."<sup>\[118\]</sup> The ship landed her
charges in Hanko, Finland on Saturday, January 17,
1920.<sup>\[119\]</sup> Upon arrival in Finland, authorities there
conducted the deportees to the Russian frontier under a flag of
truce.<sup>\[120\]\[121\]</sup>

### Russia

Here, Emma Goldman delivers a eulogy at Peter Kropotkin's funeral
procession. Immediately in front of Goldman stands her lifelong comrade
Alexander Berkman. Kropotkin's funeral was the occasion of the last
great demonstration of anarchists in Moscow—tens of thousands of people
poured into the streets to pay their respects.

Goldman initially viewed the Bolshevik revolution in a positive light.
She wrote in *Mother Earth* that despite its dependence on Communist
government, it represented "the most fundamental, far-reaching and
all-embracing principles of human freedom and of economic
well-being".<sup>\[122\]</sup> By the time she neared Europe, however,
she expressed fears about what was to come. She was worried about the
ongoing Russian Civil War and the possibility of being seized by
anti-Bolshevik forces. The state, anti-capitalist though it was, also
posed a threat. "I could never in my life work within the confines of
the State," she wrote to her niece, "Bolshevist or
otherwise."<sup>\[123\]</sup>

Goldman's experiences in Soviet Russia led to her 1923 book, *My
Disillusionment in Russia*.

She quickly discovered that her fears were justified. Days after
returning to Petrograd (Saint Petersburg), she was shocked to hear a
party official refer to free speech as a "bourgeois
superstition".<sup>\[124\]</sup> As she and Berkman traveled around the
country, they found repression, mismanagement, and
corruption<sup>\[125\]</sup> instead of the equality and worker
empowerment they had dreamed of. Those who questioned the government
were demonized as counter-revolutionaries,<sup>\[125\]</sup> and workers
labored under severe conditions.<sup>\[125\]</sup> They met with
Vladimir Lenin, who assured them that government suppression of press
liberties was justified. He told them: "There can be no free speech in a
revolutionary period."<sup>\[126\]</sup> Berkman was more willing to
forgive the government's actions in the name of "historical necessity",
but he eventually joined Goldman in opposing the Soviet state's
authority.<sup>\[127\]</sup>

In March 1921, strikes erupted in Petrograd when workers took to the
streets demanding better food rations and more union autonomy. Goldman
and Berkman felt a responsibility to support the strikers, stating: "To
remain silent now is impossible, even criminal."<sup>\[128\]</sup> The
unrest spread to the port town of Kronstadt, where the government
ordered a military response to suppress striking soldiers and sailors.
In the Kronstadt rebellion, approximately 1,000 rebelling sailors and
soldiers were killed and two thousand more were arrested; many were
later executed. In the wake of these events, Goldman and Berkman decided
there was no future in the country for them. "More and more", she wrote,
"we have come to the conclusion that we can do nothing here. And as we
can not keep up a life of inactivity much longer we have decided to
leave."<sup>\[129\]</sup>

In December 1921, they left the country and went to the Latvian capital
city of Riga. The US commissioner in that city wired officials in
Washington DC, who began requesting information from other governments
about the couple's activities. After a short trip to Stockholm, they
moved to Berlin for several years; during this time Goldman agreed to
write a series of articles about her time in Russia for Joseph
Pulitzer's newspaper, the *New York World.* These were later collected
and published in book form as *My Disillusionment in Russia* (1923) and
*My Further Disillusionment in Russia* (1924). The publishers added
these titles to attract attention; Goldman protested, albeit in
vain.<sup>\[130\]</sup>

### England, Canada, and France

Goldman found it difficult to acclimate to the German leftist community
in Berlin. Communists despised her outspokenness about Soviet
repression; liberals derided her radicalism. While Berkman remained in
Berlin helping Russian exiles, Goldman moved to London in September
1924. Upon her arrival, the novelist Rebecca West arranged a reception
dinner for her, attended by philosopher Bertrand Russell, novelist H. G.
Wells, and more than 200 other guests. When she spoke of her
dissatisfaction with the Soviet government, the audience was shocked.
Some left the gathering; others berated her for prematurely criticizing
the Communist experiment.<sup>\[131\]</sup> Later, in a letter, Russell
declined to support her efforts at systemic change in the Soviet Union
and ridiculed her anarchist idealism.<sup>\[132\]</sup>

The 1927 executions of Italian anarchists Nicola Sacco (right) and
Bartolomeo Vanzetti were troubling for Goldman, then living alone in
Canada.

In 1925, the spectre of deportation loomed again, but a Scottish
anarchist named James Colton offered to marry her and provide British
citizenship. Although they were only distant acquaintances, she accepted
and they were married on June 27, 1925. Her new status gave her peace of
mind, and allowed her to travel to France and Canada.<sup>\[133\]</sup>
Life in London was stressful for Goldman; she wrote to Berkman: "I am
awfully tired and so lonely and heartsick. It is a dreadful feeling to
come back here from lectures and find not a kindred soul, no one who
cares whether one is dead or alive."<sup>\[134\]</sup> She worked on
analytical studies of drama, expanding on the work she had published in
1914. But the audiences were "awful," and she never finished her second
book on the subject.<sup>\[135\]</sup>

Goldman traveled to Canada in 1927, just in time to receive news of the
impending executions of Italian anarchists Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo
Vanzetti in Boston. Angered by the many irregularities of the case, she
saw it as another travesty of justice in the US. She longed to join the
mass demonstrations in Boston; memories of the Haymarket affair
overwhelmed her, compounded by her isolation. "Then," she wrote, "I had
my life before me to take up the cause for those killed. Now I have
nothing."<sup>\[136\]\[137\]</sup>

In 1928, she began writing her autobiography, with the support of a
group of American admirers, including journalist H. L. Mencken, poet
Edna St. Vincent Millay, novelist Theodore Dreiser and art collector
Peggy Guggenheim, who raised \$4,000 for her.<sup>\[138\]</sup> She
secured a cottage in the French coastal city of Saint-Tropez and spent
two years recounting her life. Berkman offered sharply critical
feedback, which she eventually incorporated at the price of a strain on
their relationship.<sup>\[139\]</sup> Goldman intended the book, *Living
My Life,* as a single volume for a price the working class could afford
(she urged no more than \$5.00); her publisher Alfred A. Knopf, however,
released it as two volumes sold together for \$7.50. Goldman was
furious, but unable to force a change. Due in large part to the Great
Depression, sales were sluggish despite keen interest from libraries
around the US.<sup>\[140\]</sup> Critical reviews were generally
enthusiastic; *The New York Times*, *The New Yorker*, and *Saturday
Review of Literature* all listed it as one of the year's top non-fiction
books.<sup>\[141\]</sup>

In 1933, Goldman received permission to lecture in the United States
under the condition that she speak only about drama and her
autobiography—but not current political events. She returned to New York
on February 2, 1934 to generally positive press coverage—except from
Communist publications. Soon she was surrounded by admirers and friends,
besieged with invitations to talks and interviews. Her visa expired in
May, and she went to Toronto in order to file another request to visit
the US. However, this second attempt was denied. She stayed in Canada,
writing articles for US publications.<sup>\[142\]</sup>

In February and March 1936, Berkman underwent a pair of prostate gland
operations. Recuperating in Nice and cared for by his companion, Emmy
Eckstein, he missed Goldman's sixty-seventh birthday in Saint-Tropez in
June. She wrote in sadness, but he never read the letter; she received a
call in the middle of the night that Berkman was in great distress. She
left for Nice immediately but when she arrived that morning, Goldman
found that he had shot himself and was in a nearly comatose paralysis.
He died later that evening.<sup>\[143\]\[144\]</sup>

### Spanish Civil War

In July 1936, the Spanish Civil War started after an attempted *coup
d'état* by parts of the Spanish Army against the government of the
Second Spanish Republic. At the same time, the Spanish anarchists,
fighting against the Nationalist forces, started an anarchist
revolution. Goldman was invited to Barcelona and in an instant, as she
wrote to her niece, "the crushing weight that was pressing down on my
heart since Sasha's death left me as by magic".<sup>\[145\]</sup> She
was welcomed by the Confederación Nacional del Trabajo (CNT) and
Federación Anarquista Ibérica (FAI) organizations, and for the first
time in her life lived in a community run by and for anarchists,
according to true anarchist principles. "In all my life", she wrote
later, "I have not met with such warm hospitality, comradeship and
solidarity."<sup>\[146\]</sup> After touring a series of collectives in
the province of Huesca, she told a group of workers: "Your revolution
will destroy forever \[the notion\] that anarchism stands for
chaos."<sup>\[147\]</sup> She began editing the weekly *CNT-FAI
Information Bulletin* and responded to English-language
mail.<sup>\[148\]</sup>

Goldman edited the English-language *Bulletin* of the
Anarcho-syndicalist organizations Confederación Nacional del Trabajo
(CNT) and Federación Anarquista Ibérica (FAI) during the Spanish Civil
War.

Goldman began to worry about the future of Spain's anarchism when the
CNT-FAI joined a coalition government in 1937—against the core anarchist
principle of abstaining from state structures—and, more distressingly,
made repeated concessions to Communist forces in the name of uniting
against fascism. She wrote that cooperating with Communists in Spain was
"a denial of our comrades in Stalin's concentration
camps".<sup>\[149\]</sup> Russia, meanwhile, refused to send weapons to
anarchist forces, and disinformation campaigns were being waged against
the anarchists across Europe and the US. Her faith in the movement
unshaken, Goldman returned to London as an official representative of
the CNT-FAI.<sup>\[150\]</sup>

Delivering lectures and giving interviews, Goldman enthusiastically
supported the Spanish anarcho-syndicalists. She wrote regularly for
*Spain and the World*, a biweekly newspaper focusing on the civil war.
In May 1937, however, Communist-led forces attacked anarchist
strongholds and broke up agrarian collectives. Newspapers in England and
elsewhere accepted the timeline of events offered by the Second Spanish
Republic at face value. British journalist George Orwell, present for
the crackdown, wrote: "\[T\]he accounts of the Barcelona riots in
May ... beat everything I have ever seen for lying."<sup>\[151\]</sup>

Goldman returned to Spain in September, but the CNT-FAI appeared to her
like people "in a burning house". Worse, anarchists and other radicals
around the world refused to support their cause.<sup>\[152\]</sup> The
Nationalist forces declared victory in Spain just before she returned to
London. Frustrated by England's repressive atmosphere—which she called
"more fascist than the fascists"<sup>\[153\]</sup>—she returned to
Canada in 1939. Her service to the anarchist cause in Spain was not
forgotten, however. On her seventieth birthday, the former
Secretary-General of the CNT-FAI, Mariano Vázquez, sent a message to her
from Paris, praising her for her contributions and naming her as "our
spiritual mother". She called it "the most beautiful tribute I have ever
received".<sup>\[154\]</sup>

### Death

On Saturday, the 17th of Febuary, 1940, Emma suffered a stroke in
Toronto, Canada and became paralyzed on her right side and mute. She
spent the next three months in hospital before suffering a second
stroke, which killed her. Her body was buried in Chicago, next to the
[Haymarket Martyrs](Haymarket_Bombing "wikilink").=

[Category:Russia](Category:Russia "wikilink")
[Category:Lithuania](Category:Lithuania "wikilink") [Category:Northern
Asia](Category:Northern_Asia "wikilink") [Category:Eastern
Europe](Category:Eastern_Europe "wikilink")
[Category:USA](Category:USA "wikilink") [Category:North
America](Category:North_America "wikilink")
[Category:Anarchists](Category:Anarchists "wikilink")
[Category:Anarchism](Category:Anarchism "wikilink")
[Category:Feminism](Category:Feminism "wikilink")
[Category:Feminists](Category:Feminists "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialists](Category:Libertarian_Socialists "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialism](Category:Libertarian_Socialism "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Anarcha-Feminism](Category:Anarcha-Feminism "wikilink")