---
title: Esquel Anti-Mine Movement
permalink: /Esquel_Anti-Mine_Movement/
---

The **Esquel Anti-Mine Movement** was an
[environmentalist](Environmentalism.md "wikilink") movement active in
[Argentina](Argentina.md "wikilink") from [2002 to
2006](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_South_America.md "wikilink").

## Background

In 2002 the local government granted a gold mining permit to US-Canadian
mining company Meridian Gold. The permit allowed them to build a large
open-pit gold mine 7 kilometres from the town of Esquel, Argentina.
Concerns were raised about the potential for a cyanide contamination
(used to leach gold from ore and highly toxic to humans) in the towns
water supply and to nearby forests with endangered trees.[^1]

## Events

The movement started with the formation of a [popular
assembly](Democratic_Assembly.md "wikilink") to coordinate the action,
composed of 3,000 people (in a town of 31,000). The assembly coordinated
protests and invading town council meetings on several occasions. Courts
ruled in the assemblies favour, and a referendum held in the town showed
most people rejected the mine. Meridian refused to abandon the project,
and the assembly illegally obtained recordings of a shareholder meaning
discussing methods of astroturfing and bribes to win over the community.
Leading to widespread anger and disgust.[^2]

## Results

Courts eventually blocked Meridian from construction the gold mine.[^3]

## References

<references />

[Category:Events](Category:Events.md "wikilink") [Category:Libertarian
Socialist Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink")
[Category:Mining](Category:Mining.md "wikilink")
[Category:Argentina](Category:Argentina.md "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialism](Category:Libertarian_Socialism.md "wikilink") [Category:South
America](Category:South_America.md "wikilink")
[Category:2000s](Category:2000s.md "wikilink")
[Category:2002](Category:2002.md "wikilink")
[Category:Environmentalism](Category:Environmentalism.md "wikilink")

[^1]: [Global Nonviolent Action
    Database](Global_Nonviolent_Action_Database.md "wikilink"): [Esquel
    community opposes to gold mining, Argentina,
    2002-2006](https://nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu/content/esquel-community-opposes-gold-mining-argentina-2002-2006)

[^2]:

[^3]: