---
title: Evergreen Cooperatives
permalink: /Evergreen_Cooperatives/
---

The **Evergreen Cooperatives**are a
[network](Network_(Organisation) "wikilink") of [worker
cooperatives](Worker_Cooperative "wikilink") in Cleveland, Ohio,
[USA](United_States_of_America "wikilink").

## History

In 1967, the [Congress of Racial
Equality](Congress_of_Racial_Equality_(USA) "wikilink") started to
organise worker cooperatives and community owned businesses. Later, in
the nearby town of Youngstown in 1977, workers and the city attempted to
buy a steel mill after it shut down to stop job losses, but failed,
although it gave rise to the idea of [workers'
control](Workers'_Self-Management "wikilink") in the area. In
[2008](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_North_America "wikilink"),
the 'Evergreen Initiative was created by the local government, charities
and student groups at local universities to start worker cooperatives.
The cooperative laundry was the first in 2008, cooperative solar was
second in 2009 and cooperative greenhouse was third in 2012.

## Co-operatives

### Evergreen Cooperative Laundry

Evergreen Cooperative Laundry (ECL) is an industrial laundry serving
local hospitals, hotels and other institutions. It operates at the
capacity of 10 million pounds of sheets and towels per year, which
represents 4% of the local market. It saves 35% of energy by warming up
the clean water with heat from the used water and eliminates hazardous
waste by using EPA-approved chemicals. It has 50 workers that are
trained upon hiring, and they are paid \$8 an hour for the first six
months, while they are on a trial period. After that, they are
considered for the membership in the co-operative by the peers’ voting.
If they are admitted, the salary grows to \$10.50 an hour, with 50 cents
collected towards the ownership share. After seven years working in the
laundry, the individual’s share will be equal to \$65,000.

### Ohio Cooperative Solar

Ohio Cooperative Solar (OCS) is a solar power and insulation
installation company, aiming to expand renewable energy and build
passive heating and cooling system for buildings across the city. It
provides work for 20 people who came from low-income neighbourhoods.

### Green City Growers Cooperative

Green City Growers Cooperative (GCGC) is a (21,000 m<sup>2</sup>)
greenhouse, a packing building, offices and advanced energy facilities.
They grow 5-6 million heads of lettuce a year (with another 300,000
pounds of herbs) all year round, supplying local shops with fresh
produce and employing 40 workers. A quicker growth cycle has been
achieved by hydroponics, i. e. floating the produce on shallow pools of
nutrient-enriched water. By carefully controlling the environment and
using grow lights in winter, a consistent crop is maintained throughout
the twelve month cycle.

### Neighborhood Voice

The *Greater University Circle Neighborhood Voice* is a free,
student-owned and student-run newspaper and online news source covering
worker co-op activity in Cleveland and other issues of concern to
residents of the Buckeye-Shaker, Central, East Cleveland, Fairfax,
Glenville, Hough, Little Ital, and University Circle neighborhoods.

## See Also

- [Earthworker Cooperatives](Earthworker_Cooperatives "wikilink") - a
  similar initiative Melbourne, [Australia](Australia "wikilink")
- [Libertarian Municipalism](Libertarian_Municipalism "wikilink")

## References

[Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") -
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evergreen_Cooperatives>

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink") [Category:Civil
Rights Movement](Category:Civil_Rights_Movement "wikilink")
[Category:USA](Category:USA "wikilink") [Category:North
America](Category:North_America "wikilink")
[Category:2008](Category:2008 "wikilink")
[Category:2000s](Category:2000s "wikilink")
[Category:2010s](Category:2010s "wikilink") [Category:21st
Century](Category:21st_Century "wikilink") [Category:Worker
Cooperatives](Category:Worker_Cooperatives "wikilink")
[Category:Environmentalism](Category:Environmentalism "wikilink")