---
title: Factory Committees and the Dictatorship of the Proletariat (Pamphlet)
permalink: /Factory_Committees_and_the_Dictatorship_of_the_Proletariat_(Pamphlet)/
---

**Factory Committees and the Dictatorship of the Proletariat** is a 1975
pamphlet written by [Chris Pallis](Chris_Pallis "wikilink") and
published by [Solidarity](Solidarity_(UK_Magazine) "wikilink"). It is a
response to [Chris Goodey](Chris_Goodey "wikilink") over the role of the
[Soviets](Soviet_(Council) "wikilink") and
[Anarchists](Anarchism "wikilink") in the [Russian
Revolution](October_Revolution_(Russia) "wikilink") and [Civil
War](Russian_Civil_War "wikilink").

## Transcript

It is a welcome sign of the times that a serious exchange of radical
opinion is now under way concerning the formative period of the [Russian
state](USSR "wikilink"), and *Critique* is to be congratulated on having
played a part in the initiation of this discussion. How deep the
confrontation goes will, of course, depend on how open the journal
remains to those in the revolutionary movement who do not accept the
label of "[Marxist](Marxism "wikilink")", but who feel they may
nevertheless have something of relevance to contribute.

In your last issue, [Chris Goodey](Chris_Goodey "wikilink") claims that
"it is only the current practice and experience of the world movement
for socialist revolution that is beginning to allow us an overall view
of the battle-stations which we have unthinkingly maintained for a long
time". In a very general sense that is, of course, true. But elements of
a serious critique antedated - and by a considerable period - "[May 1968
in France](May_1968_Events_(France) "wikilink"), the [Prague
events](Prague_Spring "wikilink") and the [Chilean
Revolution](Salvador_Allende "wikilink")". Some of those who initiated
this critique would moreover shudder to find themselves subsumed under
the "we" that Goodey refers to. They did not wait until the late sixties
to express their views. As early as 1918 they had clearly seen the
direction in which Russian society was moving and proclaimed a
principled opposition, often at the cost of their lives. It is a tragic
fact, for which Leninists of all kinds (Stalinists, Trotskyists,
Maoists, and the advocates of various theories of "state capitalism",
i.e. International Socialists, Bordigists, "Marxist Humanists", etc.)
must carry their full share of responsibility, that we know less today
about the early weeks of [Russian
Revolution](October_Revolution_(Russia) "wikilink") than we do, for
instance, about the history of the [Paris
Commune](Paris_Commune "wikilink").

"Unfortunately it is not the workers who write history. It is always
'the others.' "[^1] "Official" historians seldom have eyes to see or
ears to hear the acts and words which express the autonomous activity of
the working class. They think in terms of institutions, congresses,
leaders. In the best instances they will vaunt rank-and-file activity as
long as it coincides with their own conceptions. But they "will
radically condemn it or impute the basest of motives to it as soon as it
deviates from that line".[^2] They seem to lack the categories of
thought necessary to perceive life as it really is. To them an activity
which has no leader or programme, no institutions and no statutes, can
only be conceptualized as "troubles", "disorder", "anarchy". In the
words of [Cardan](Cornelius_Castoriadis "wikilink") "the spontaneous
activity of the masses belongs, by definition, to what history
suppresses".[^3]

Goodey is correct when he claims it is "part of the revolutionary
process to demystify our own history" and when he points out that the
struggle for "direct forms of working people's power at the point of
production" has been "hidden and ignored". (The formulation in the
passive is, however, disingenuous. By whom was it hidden? And why was it
ignored?) But he is profoundly wrong when he attributes this silence of
the "Marxist left" to such ideological shortcomings as lack of
"temerity" or insufficient "capacity for self-criticism". A proper
evaluation of these matters cannot but lead, for anyone with even
moderate pretensions to intellectual honesty, to a complete break with
Leninism in all its aspects and to a re-examination of certain basic
Marxist beliefs.

A steady trickle of documentation is now coming to light concerning the
role of the Factory Committees in the Russian Revolution.[^4] Goodey
sees these Committees as "the most powerful institution in Russia by the
end of 1917" and in this he is certainly right. He is also correct in
claiming that "this power later submerged". What is lacking in his
article, however, is the serious attempt to explain what happened in
between, when it happened, why it happened, and to whom it happened. The
"submergence" of which Goodey speaks was well advanced, if not virtually
completed, by May 1918, i.e. *before* the [Civil
War](Russian_Civil_War "wikilink") and the
"[Allied](Allied_Intervention_in_the_Russian_Civil_War "wikilink")"
intervention really got under way. The traditional explanations of the
degeneration of the Russian revolution are just not good enough.

In my view, Goodey's silence on these essential questions is
unavoidable. It flows directly from his honestly declared political
position. He sees Party and State as "indirect forms of workers' power",
and explicitly absolves the Leninist Party from any blame in the
degeneration. He claims that "even in our present world, in spite of the
fact that bureaucratic degeneration is inherent in the 'workers' state'
and the 'workers' party, these are still the necessary complement to
forms of direct workers' power". He only conceives these forms of direct
workers' power as "effective anti-bodies against that degeneration". He
nowhere posits them as the necessarily dominant units in the initiation
of policy, in other words as the basic nuclei of the new society. With
this kind of overall outlook a serious analysis of the smashing of the
Factory Committees is virtually impossible, for the Bolshevik Party was
to play a dominant role in this tragedy. There is nothing more utopian
than the belief that the Russian working class could have maintained its
power through a "workers' party" or a "workers' state" when it had
already lost that power at the point of production.

I have elsewhere[^5] sought to bring together material from disparate
sources and to document as concisely and yet as fully as possible the
various stages of a process which led, within the short period of four
years, from the tremendous upsurge of the Factory Committee movement (a
movement which both implicitly and explicitly sought to alter the
relations of production) to the establishment of unquestioned domination
by a monolithic and bureaucratic agency (the Party) over all aspects of
economical and political life. I argued that as this agency was not
itself based on production, its rule could only epitomize the continued
limitation of the authority of the workers in the productive process.
This necessarily implied the perpetuation within society at large.

It is impossible, within the space available, to recapitulate all the
evidence here. The first stage of the process under discussion was the
subordination of the Factory Committees to the All-Russian Council for
Workers' Control in which the unions (themselves already strongly under
Party influence) were heavily represented. This took place very shortly
after the coming to power of the Soviet Government. The second phase -
which almost immediately followed the first - was the incorporation of
this All-Russian Council for Workers' Control into the Vesenka (Supreme
Economic Council), even more heavily weighted in favour of the unions,
but also comprising direct nominees of the state (i.e. of the Party). By
early 1918 the Bolsheviks were actively seeking to merge the Committees
into the trade union structures. The issue provoked heated discussions
at the First All-Russian Congress of Trade Unions (January 7-14, 1918)
which saw desperate attempts, led mainly by
[anarcho-syndicalists](Anarcho-Syndicalism "wikilink"), to maintain the
autonomy of the Committees, against the advice Ryazanov who urged the
Committees "to commit suicide by becoming an integral element of the
trade union structure".[^6] During the next two years a sustained
campaign was waged to curb the power of the unions themselves, for the
unions, albeit in a very indirect and distorted way, could still be
influenced by the working class. It was particularly important for the
new bureaucracy to replace this power by the authority of direct party
nominees. These managers and administrators, nearly all appointed from
above, gradually came to form the basis of a new ruling class. The
important point, as far as the re-evaluation of history is concerned, is
that each of these steps was to be resisted, but each fight was to be
lost. Each time, the "adversary" appeared in the garb of the new
"proletarian" power. And each defeat was to make it more difficult for
the working class itself directly to manage production, i.e.
fundamentally to alter its status as a subordinate class.

Goodey claims that the "essence of the libertarian argument is that the
level of the productive forces plays a less determining role in the
development of history than the existence of hierarchy: in the
revolutionary process that hierarchy takes the form of
'authoritarianism' among the leaders (in this case the Bolshevik Party)
and 'false consciousness' among the masses in submitting to what they
consider their natural leaders". It is difficult to know from where he
can derive such a crudely psychological formulation of the libertarian
case. As far as I know, no libertarian has argued that the level of the
productive forces is either "more" or "less" important than the role of
ideas and attitudes in influencing historical development. Both are
important. What libertarians have stressed (and most Marxists have
signally refused to recognize) is that the conceptions and attitudes of
the dominant Party were as much an objective fact of history -
influencing the evolution of events at critical moments - as were
production statistics for electricity or steel.

Goodey claims that the libertarian argument "can be nailed quite easily"
and I find it a compliment that he should choose my essay on which to
practice his skills as a carpenter. He focuses attention on one
particular episode I describe in the hope that by challenging its
factual accuracy he can somehow impugn the credibility of the rest. He
correctly defines the area of the discussion. "The argument is that
Lenin and Bolshevik leaders suppressed the factory committees
immediately on the seizure of Power, because they held too much real
power". Right on! Goodey is also correct in attributing to me the view
"the legislation on workers' control immediately after October was
elaborated in totally different ways by Lenin and by the committees'
leaders". Again, right on! There is abundant evidence (summarized in my
text) to substantiate this view. The Achilles' heel of my thesis is
allegedly my reference to a document drawn up by certain members of the
Central Council of Petrograd Factory Committees on how the economy
should have been run immediately after the October events. I am quite
prepared to take up the challenge on this rather narrow basis.

According to Goodey (and he devotes three pages to the matter) my
knowledge of the document in question was "fifth hand". I had inherited
from one [Didier Limon](Didier_Limon "wikilink")[^7] "an amputated
quotation, bearing the wrong date, the wrong title, and the wrong
authors". I had then "rewritten the text". Strong stuff. Unfortunately,
on every single point Goodey is wrong.

According to Goodey the fateful history of this document was as follows.
It was originally published in part in *Izvestia* (December 7, 1917) and
fully in *Narodnoe Khozyaistvo* (no. 1, 1918). Lozovsky, a Bolshevik
trade unionist, allegedly altered its title from "Draft Instructions on
Workers' Control" to "Practical Manual for the Execution of Workers'
Control". This was done in his book, *Rabochii Kontrol*, which according
to Goodey was written "in November of 1917". (Goodey does not explain
how Lozovsky could, in November 1917, have been distorting the title of
a text that had not yet been published, but this is a minor point.)
Then, still according to Goodey's chronology, Pankratova took up the
text in her writings of 1923.[^8] For reasons of her own she dated it
February 6, 1918 (i.e. after the First Trade Union Congress, which
sought to "fuse from above" the Factory Committees and the Unions).
Goodey is to be congratulated in detecting this early piece of
falsification by one of Stalin's pet historians. But the relevance of
this to what either Limon or I wrote totally escapes me: neither of us
gave the wrong date for the text under discussion.

According to Goodey, Limon takes over from Pankratova "the wrong title
and the wrong date and adds his own embellishments". He truncates a
quotation in the text and changes the authorship of the original
document, attributing it to the "non-Bolshevik leaders of the
All-Russian Council of the Factory Committees". On all these scores,
Goodey is wrong. Limon did *not* get his facts[^9] via Pankratova. The
"secret" can now be let out of the bag. Limon got his facts from someone
who had seen the documentation at the first hand, and before Pankratova
had even thought of writing about it. I have also seen this original
source. Even Goodey could have had access to it, had he been less
concerned in proving the bad faith of those he disagrees with
politically, and had he chosen to check with Limon. (Limon is, after
all, on the Editorial Board of *Autogestion*, for which Goodey is the
"correspondent for Great Britain".)

The "original" source is Chapter 8 ("Les Soviets d'usine à l'oeuvre") of
[Max Hoschiller's](Max_Hoschiller "wikilink") book *Le Mirage
Sovietique* (Paris: Payot, 1921). Hoschiller was a French revolutionary
who spoke Russian well. The authenticity of his account is vouched for
by no less a figure than [André Merrheim](André_Merrheim "wikilink") who
wrote the Preface to Hoschiller's book.[^10]It was in fact at Merrheim's
suggestion that Hoschiller went to Russia.

Now what does Hoschiller say as to the authorship, the title, and the
content of the controversial document?

Hoschiller makes it clear that in the weeks preceding the revolution it
was the [anarchists](Anarchism "wikilink") who were striking the tune
("*donnaient le la*") in the Factory Committees and that the Bolsheviks
could only trail along after them ("*étaient bien obligés de marcher à
leur remorque*"). On December 7, 1917, the decree setting up the
Vesenkha (Supreme Economic Council) was promulgated.[^11] The Vesenkha
comprised some members of the All-Russian Council of Workers' Control (a
very indirect sop to the Factory Committees), massive representation of
all the new Commissariats and a number of experts, nominated from above,
in a consultative capacity. According to Hoschiller the leaders of the
Factory Committees, dissatisfied with Lenin's concessions ("*mécontents
en dépit de toutes les concessions du chef du gouvernement*"), did not
implement the decisions but elaborated their own decree in the form of a
"Practical Manual for the Implementation of Workers' Control"
("*élaborerent leur pro-pre décret sous forme d'un* *'Manuel Pratique
pour l'Execution du Contrôle Ouvrier*' "). Hoschiller describes how
jealously he had kept the eight great in-folio sheets, printed in double
columns, that had been widely distributed in the streets of Petrograd.
He has clearly seen the original, which is more than can be said with
any confidence of Lozovski, Pankratova ... or even of Goodey.

Goodey then takes issue with Limon's attribution of this text to the
"non-Bolshevik leaders of the All-Russian Council of Factory
Committees". Is he really suggesting that the "Manual" was a Party
document? Reference to the Hoschiller text shows that it was no such
thing. One particular prescription of the "Manual" epitomizes this
point. The "Manual" spoke of "Regional Federations of Factory
Committees" and of the need for a "National Union of Factory
Committees". But even Deutscher is forced to point out that such demands
were diametrically opposed to Party policy at the time. "A few weeks
after the upheaval the Factory Committees attempted to form their own
national organization ... The Bolsheviks now called upon the trade
unions to render a special service to the nascent Soviet State and to
discipline the Factory Committees. The unions came out firmly against
the attempt of the Factory Committees to form a national organization of
their own. They prevented the convocation of a planned All-Russian
Congress of Factory Committees".[^12] It ill behoves various Bolsheviks,
after all this, to denounce the Factory Committees as only having had
parochial preoccupations.

Two other facts stress the wide divergence of approach already obvious
at this stage between the Leninists and the leaders of the Factory
Committees. First the very real difficulties Lenin experienced in
getting wide support for his "Draft Decrees on Workers' Control". These
were originally published in *Pravda* (on November 3, 1917) but only
ratified by the V.Ts.I.K. (All-Russian Central Executive Committee of
the Soviets) eleven days later, after heated opposition from the rank
and file of the Factory Committees.[^13] Secondly the fact that
*Izvestiya* (December 13, 1917) found it necessary to publish a text
("General Instructions on Workers' Control in Conformity with the Decree
of November 14") which became widely known as the "Counter-Manual".

Concerning the substance of the passage under dispute Hoschiller's text
makes it crystal clear that Limon has "amputated" nothing. Quoting from
the introduction to the "Manual", Hoschiller (p. 167) writes that
workers' control "*ne doit pas être consideré dans le sens étroit d'une
révision mais dans le sens plus large de* '*l'ingerance*' ". Full stop.
(A full stop put by Hoschiller, not by Limon. And a reasonable place, I
would have thought, at which to end a quotation.) That my own reference
to this document included, through the carelessness of a misplaced
unquote, a few words that were Limon's hardly constitutes "rewriting the
text" and alters precisely nothing to the substance of the matter.[^14]

So there you have it. No plot. No "fifth hand knowledge" of a
"shop-soiled" quotation. No Lozovsky as the "evident" original secondary
source of all the rest. No wrong dates inherited from Pankratova. No
Limon changing the authorship of the document. No truncating of
quotations. All these are figments of Goodey's imagination and he should
clearly stop prattling about "attitudes to verifiable facts". If this is
really the best your contributor can do to "nail" the libertarian
argument those who manufacture bandages for sore thumbs are in for a
boom.

But let us return to the main argument. Goodey claims that "if ... there
was a nascent bureaucracy in 1917, then the Factory Committees were part
of it". This is totally to misunderstand the concept of bureaucracy. It
attributes to the word a restricted meaning, of little value to those
who seek radically to change society. The classical Marxist conceptions
are here totally inadequate. A bureaucracy is not just "officialdom" or
a "social stratum enjoying certain material privileges" or a "gendarme,
ensuring a certain pattern of distribution under conditions of want". If
the concept of self-management is to have any meaning a bureaucracy must
be seen as a group seeking to manage *from the outside* the activities
of others. If that group has a monopoly of decisional authority, its
bureaucratic potential will be vastly enhanced. In this sense if there
was a nascent bureaucracy by the end of 1917 in Russia it was certainly
not to be found in the Factory Committees. It was to be found in the
Party itself. Certain Party attitudes here played a very important role.
Trotsky himself (if we must refer to him) perceptively described all
this. Referring to the Third Party Congress (April 25-May 10, 1905) he
spoke of "the young revolutionary bureaucrat already emerging as a type.
They were far more intransigent and severe with the revolutionary
working men than with themselves, preferring to domineer".[^15] No less
a man than Lenin had written that "a worker-agitator who shows any
talent should not work in the factory".[^16] Is it any wonder that with
these conceptions the Party soon lost all contact with the class?

Goodey seeks to prove his point that the Factory Committees belong to
the nascent bureaucracy by looking at the later careers of certain
Factory Committees' leaders: men such as Chubar, Matvei, Zhivotov and
Skrypnik. That non-Bolshevik leaders of the Factory Committees later
supported the Bolsheviks is indisputable. But so what? It is not unknown
for individual shop stewards to end up as foremen. Does this really
prove anything beyond the capacity of established power, in its various
garbs, to recuperate dissent? Does the fact that Alexandra Kollontai
later became a Stalinist ambassador invalidate her earlier writings on
the emancipation of women? Does Trotsky's later Bolshevism invalidate
his prophetic warnings of 1904 on the subject of the Party substituting
itself for the working class?[^17]

If Goodey is really interested in the history of what happened to the
personnel of the Factory Committees (and not to just a few of their
leaders) a fruitful area might be the history of the various syndicalist
groups, and in particular of the "Revolutionary Centre of Factory
Committees", a body of anarchist inspiration which competed for a while
with the All-Russian Council of Factory Committees, without ever
succeeding in supplanting it, so many were the obstacles put in its
path. The search will, I suspect, prove disappointing. Systematic
persecution of "left" dissidents soon became a way of life. Proletarian
partisans of the individual Factory Committees tried to resist and to
regroup but their resistance was easily overcome.[^18] The search also
might encompass the fate of groupings of Bolshevik origin, such as
Masnikov's *Workers' Group* (an offspring from the Workers' Opposition)
and of Bogdanov's *Workers' Truth*. One fact such a search will reveal -
and of this there can be little doubt - is that this group had perceived
(as early as 1921, without the privilege of hindsight, and far more
clearly than does Chris Goodey) that the "dictatorship of the
proletariat" had been liquidated *pari passu* with the liquidation of
the Factory Committees.

## Notes

<references />

## External Links

- [Factory Committees and the Dictatorship of the
  Proletariat](https://www.marxists.org/archive/brinton/1975/factory-committees.htm)
  at [marxists.org](marxists.org "wikilink")

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink") [Category:Chris
Pallis](Category:Chris_Pallis "wikilink")
[Category:Pamphlets](Category:Pamphlets "wikilink")

[^1]: [Paul Cardan](Cornelius_Castoriadis "wikilink"), "Le Rôle de
    l'idéologie bolchevique dans la naissance de la bureaucratie",
    *[Socialisme ou Barbarie](Socialisme_ou_Barbarie "wikilink")*, no.
    35 (January-March 1964). This text was subsequently published in
    English as Solidarity Pamphlet 24, *From Bolshevism to the
    Bureaucracy* (1967).

[^2]: *Ibid.*

[^3]: *Ibid.*

[^4]: [Carr's](E.H._Carr "wikilink") *[The Bolshevik Revolution,
    1917-1923](The_Bolshevik_Revolution,_1917-1923_(Book) "wikilink")*
    (Macmillan, 1952), [Daniels's](Robert_Vincent_Daniel "wikilink")
    *[The Conscience of the
    Revolution](The_Conscience_of_the_Revolution_(Book) "wikilink")*
    (Harvard University Press, 1960), [Avrich's](Paul_Avrich "wikilink")
    *[The Russian Anarchists](The_Russian_Anarchists_(Book) "wikilink")*
    (Princeton University Press, 1967) and Kaplan's *Bolshevik Ideology*
    (Owen, 1969) provide an excellent starting point for anyone
    interested in the discussion.

[^5]: *[The Bolsheviks and Workers' Control,
    1917-1921](The_Bolsheviks_and_Workers'_Control_(Book) "wikilink")*
    (Solidarity, 1970).

[^6]: D. B. Ryazanov in *Pervy vserossiiskii s'yezd professionalnykh
    soyuzov, 7-14 yanvarya 1918 g*. (First All-Russian Congress of Trade
    Unions, January 7 to 14, 1918) (Moscow, 1918), p. 235.

[^7]: Didier Limon, "Lenine et le controle ouvrier" (*Autogestion*
    (Paris), no. 4 (1967)).

[^8]: Pankratova's article on "The Factory Committees in Russia at the
    Time of the Revolution (1917-1918)" was published in the previously
    mentioned issue of *Autogestion*.

[^9]: Personal communication from Didier Limon.

[^10]: Merrheim, one-time secretary of the [French Metalworkers'
    Federation](French_Metalworkers'_Federation "wikilink") and
    co-author of the Charter of Amiens, was one of the important figures
    of the anti-war movement in France during the [First World
    War](World_War_I "wikilink"). He was an active participant in the
    [Zimmerwald Conference](Zimmerwald_Conference "wikilink") of
    anti-war socialists.

[^11]: Sobraniye uzakonenii 1917-1918, no. 4, art. 58.

[^12]: Isaac Deutscher, *Soviet Trade Unions* (London: Royal Institute
    for International Affairs, 1950), p. 17.

[^13]: According to Carr (*The Bolshevik Revolution*, Vol. 2 (Pelican
    edition, 1966), p. 73) "in the controversy behind the scenes which
    followed the publication of Lenin's draft, the trade unions became
    the unexpected champions of order, discipline and centralized
    direction of production; and the revised draft decree finally
    presented to V.Ts.I.K. on 14-27 November 1917 was the result of a
    struggle between the trade unions and the Factory Committees which
    repeated the struggle at the October Conference". (The First
    All-Russian Conference of Factory Committees had been held on
    October 17-22, 1917.)

[^14]: Brinton, *op. cit.*, p. 62.

[^15]: [Leon Trotsky](Leon_Trotsky "wikilink"), *Stalin* (London: Hollis
    and Carter, 1947), p. 61.

[^16]: [Lenin](Vladimir_Lenin "wikilink"), *Sochineniya*, IV, p. 44.

[^17]: See *Our Political Tasks*.

[^18]: Maurice Dobb, *Soviet Economic Development since 1917* (New York,
    1948), pp. 89-90.