---
title: Green Corn Rebellion (1917)
permalink: /Green_Corn_Rebellion_(1917)/
---

The **Green Corn Rebellion** was an attempted anti-conscription uprising
that occurred in 1917 in Seminole County, Oklahoma,
[USA](United_States_of_America "wikilink"). Several farmers armed
themselves and began to march, only to be stopped by law enforcement
(who had an informer with the farmers) that led to a shootout that the
farmers lost and subsequently led to a massive wave of repression of
left-wing organisations.

## Background

Woodrow Wilson had recently became President of the USA and he had
campaigned on keeping the US out of [World War
I](World_War_I "wikilink"), which he went back on very quickly.
Conscription angered many, and the opposition was led by the radical
left, notably the [Socialist Party of
America](Socialist_Party_of_America "wikilink") and [Industrial Workers
of the World](Industrial_Workers_of_the_World "wikilink").

On July 20, 1917, a blindfolded Newton D. Baker, the Wilson
administration's Secretary of War, drew numbers choosing certain
registered young men for mandatory military service. Opponents of
American participation in the war continued their efforts to change the
country's course, holding meetings and distributing
pamphlets.<sup>\[7\]</sup> Among the leading organized forces in
opposition to conscription and the war was the Socialist Party of
America, which at its April 1917 National Convention had declared its
"unalterable opposition" to the war and urged the workers of the world
to "refuse support to the governments in their wars."<sup>\[8\]</sup>

### The situation in Oklahoma

Although it was a young state, admitted into the union only in November
1907, there was already a strong radical tradition in Oklahoma, in which
the impoverished tenant farmers of the southeastern part of the state
seized upon the millenarian fervor of the early Socialist Party in an
attempt to improve their lives.<sup>\[9\]</sup> In the 1916 election,
despite Woodrow Wilson's siphoning off a portion of the anti-war vote
for the Democratic ticket, the Socialist Party garnered more than a
quarter of the votes cast in the 1916 election in Seminole County and
22% in neighboring Pontotoc County.<sup>\[10\]</sup>

Nor was the Socialist Party the only active organizers in the area — in
1916 a radical tenant farmers' organization called the "Working Class
Union (WCU)" claimed a membership of as much as 20,000 in Eastern
Oklahoma alone.<sup>\[11\]</sup> The group's ideology blended what one
historian has called "a muddled industrial unionism with traditional
southern forms of countervigilantism, self-defense, and opposition to
conscription" and arose as a complement to the radical syndicalism of
the Industrial Workers of the World — an organization which barred
membership by tenant farmers.<sup>\[12\]</sup>

Tenant farmers were predominantly young – the age group most impacted by
conscription. Some 76% of Oklahoma farmers under age 24 rented their
land, while 45% of those between the ages of 25 and 33 found themselves
tenants.<sup>\[13\]</sup> Most tenant farmers were
white<sup>\[13\]</sup> and African-American.<sup>\[14\]</sup> Many of
these young "dirt farmers" found their economic prospects hopeless,
squeezed between a usurious credit system practiced by stores and
substantial crop liens inflicted by landlords.<sup>\[13\]</sup> The
depleted condition of Oklahoma's land forced the input of twice as much
labor as the sharecroppers of Mississippi and Louisiana to generate
comparable yields.<sup>\[13\]</sup> Disaffection was rife and proposals
for radical solutions found ready ears.<sup>\[13\]</sup> The draft would
have depleted much needed farm labor, and many farms would have been
foreclosed leaving women and children destitute. There was no oil boom
yet and little alternative work, and no welfare system.

Despite the WCU's highly questionable membership claims, ballooning to
35,000 for the whole state of Oklahoma,<sup>\[2\]</sup> the group had by
1917 clearly established a solid foothold among the tenant farmers of
Oklahoma. The organization was not a tame one, taking the form of secret
society, with activities which included night riding and the use of
physical violence against its opponents.<sup>\[15\]</sup>

Hostilities between the radical rural supporters of the WCU and the
conservative forces of the towns of the region ran high, with dynamite
used against cattle dipping-vats late in 1915 in protest of a mandatory
use of costly insecticide that some felt was as lethal to dipped cattle
as to the ticks and other parasites they carried.<sup>\[16\]</sup> The
controversy was punctuated by a shotgun blast fired through the window
of the Pontotoc County Attorney early in 1916.<sup>\[17\]</sup>
Conservative voices declared the action to be an act of political
terrorism, while radicals charged the shot to be a provocation, "part of
a concocted plan on the part of the officials and two or three
newspapers to wreck the Socialist Party by pulling off a fake attempted
assassination."<sup>\[17\]</sup>

Town dwellers, who had been subject to perennial attacks as "robbers,
thieves, and grafters" by radical public speakers, were thoroughly
convinced that the Socialists and the secret WCU were part of a single
radical conspiracy to launch a long-desired revolution in their own
locale.<sup>\[17\]</sup>

The Muscogee Creek Nation at time of the rebellion was controlled by
only 61 mixed blood Creek and intermarried white
individuals.<sup>\[18\]</sup> August 3 marked the end of the Muscogee
Creek Green Corn Ceremony.<sup>\[19\]</sup>

In early August 1917, preceding the rebellion, large numbers of
African-American, European-American, and Native American men gathered at
the farm of Joe and John Spears in Sasakwa (at Roasting Ear Ridge) to
plan a march upon Washington, DC to end the
war.<sup>\[2\]\[20\]\[21\]</sup>

View of Roasting Ear Ridge (left side of the road) from south of the
intersection of EW 1390 and NS 3630, facing South. North of Sasakwa,
Seminole County, Oklahoma, August 4, 2017

### The rebellion

The Little River, near Sasakwa, Oklahoma, the site of an ambush of a
Seminole County sheriff and deputy.

The so-called Green Corn Rebellion may be said to have started on
Thursday, August 2, 1917, when a Seminole County sheriff, Frank Grall
and visiting deputy Bill Cross, were ambushed near the Little River, a
tributary of the Canadian river.<sup>\[22\]</sup> Raiding parties
followed this action, cutting telephone lines and burning railroad
bridges.<sup>\[22\]</sup>

On Friday, August 3, exactly two weeks after the draft lottery in
Washington, D.C., an armed gathering assembled near the adjoining
borders of Pontotoc, Seminole, and Hughes counties in Southeastern
Oklahoma.<sup>\[23\]</sup> The uprising seems to have been spurred by
the agitation of the Working Class Union, which was reported in one
newspaper as having called its supporters to arms with a manifesto which
declared:

Unfortunately, no documents written by WCU members have survived and the
mentality of those taking up arms must be considered
speculative.<sup>\[25\]</sup> Still, historians do speculate. Historian
Garin Burbank argues that the coming of conscription threatened to
decimate family economies by removing able-bodied young men needed to
harvest cotton.<sup>\[26\]</sup> Moreover, Burbank argues, Socialist
ideas had found its mark in Oklahoma, with many poor farmers earnestly
believing from their experiences in daily life in the reality of
"exploitation" and accepting the notion that the European war was little
more than capitalist business enterprise writ large.<sup>\[25\]</sup>

The country folk, in short, saw military conscription as an invasion of
their rights, and they rebelled in an attempt to keep the government
from taking away their sons.<sup>\[27\]</sup>

Arming themselves, an estimated 800 to 1000 rebels, "the vast majority
of old American stock," met on the banks of the South Canadian River and
made plans to head East, living off the land as they
marched.<sup>\[28\]</sup> They would eat roasted "green corn" and
barbecued beef on the way, so it was later said, eventually joining up
with countless thousands of likeminded comrades who would together march
on Washington, DC where they would overthrow "Big Slick" Woodrow Wilson,
repeal the draft act, and end the war.<sup>\[29\]</sup>

These plans were instantly betrayed to local authorities by an
informer.<sup>\[30\]\[29\]</sup> A posse of townsmen was formed and
headed to the river banks to meet the ostensible revolutionaries. The
so-called rebellion proved anti-climactic, as historian Garin Burbank
notes:

The incident was over within a few hours and mass arrests of
participants were begun.<sup>\[31\]</sup>

### Aftermath and legacy

The Canadian River in Southeastern Oklahoma, not far from the location
of the abortive Green Corn Rebellion.

A total of three people were killed in the Green Corn Rebellion of
August 1917,<sup>\[2\]\[31\]</sup> one of whom was Clifford Clark, an
African American tenant farmer.<sup>\[32\]</sup> Nearly 450 people were
detained in connection with the incident, of whom 266 were released
without charges being filed.<sup>\[31\]</sup> Charges were levied
against 184 participants, of whom about 150 were convicted or pleaded
guilty, receiving jail and prison terms ranging from 60 days to ten
years.<sup>\[33\]</sup> Those identified as leaders of the uprising
received the heaviest sentences.<sup>\[34\]</sup>

While most were paroled or pardoned after a short period, five men
remained in the Federal prison in Leavenworth, Kansas, in February 1922.

The so-called "rebellion" was used as a cudgel against the Socialist
Party of Oklahoma, with the party being blamed for the incident despite
its largely spontaneous and external origins.<sup>\[2\]</sup> This was
one in a series of events that undermined the American socialist
movement and fueled the Red Scare.<sup>\[35\]</sup>

The Industrial Workers of the World shared the brunt of popular
indignation, despite the fact that the organization took no part in the
Green Corn Rebellion and was related to the WCU only by virtue of the
latter group having formed in response to the IWW's refusal to organize
tenant farmers.<sup>\[12\]</sup> The IWW was still blamed for every
action of the WCU, however, and the bogey Green Corn Rebellion was
ultimately used as a justification for further measures against the IWW
nationally.<sup>\[36\]</sup>

An elderly Seminole-Muscogee Creek woman relayed to Roxanne Dunbar-Ortiz
that her uncle had been imprisoned after the rebellion. She is quoted,
"The full moon of late July, early August it was, the Moon of the Green
Corn. It was not easy to persuade our poor white and black brothers and
sisters to rise up. We told them that rising up, standing up, whatever
the consequences, would inspire future generations. Our courage, our
bravery would be remembered and copied. That has been the Indian way for
centuries, since the invasions. Fight and tell the story so that those
who come after or their descendants will rise up once again. It may take
a thousand years, but that is how we continue and eventually
prevail."<sup>\[19\]</sup>

A fictionalized account of the abortive revolt can be found in William
Cunningham's novel, *The Green Corn Rebellion,* published by Vanguard
Press in 1935. The novel was republished by University of Oklahoma Press
in 2010.<sup>\[37\]</sup> Sam Marcy, founder of Workers World Party
upheld the Green Corn Rebellion as the ideal working class, anti-war
struggle in his book "The Bolsheviks and War" published in
1985.<sup>\[38\]</sup> In 2017 the Centennial of the Green Corn
Rebellion was marked by media coverage<sup>\[39\]\[40\]</sup> and the
launch of a website to archive historical and current interpretations of
the event.<sup>\[41\]</sup>