---
title: Guayaquil General Strike (1922)
permalink: /Guayaquil_General_Strike_(1922)/
---

The **Guayaquil General Strike of 1922** was a three-day long [general
strike](List_of_General_Strikes "wikilink") in the city of Guayaquil,
[Ecuador](Ecuador "wikilink") in
[November](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_South_America "wikilink")
[1922](Revolutions_of_1916_-_1923 "wikilink"). The strike enjoyed a
strong [anarcho-syndicalist](Anarcho-Syndicalism "wikilink") presence.

## Background

In the early 1920s, Ecuador suffered an economic crisis due to a drop in
the global price of the cocoa bean, which at the time was the main
export of the country. Guayaquil had experienced rapid economic growth
in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century due to its location
in the Guayas River basin—a region with near-ideal conditions for
growing cocoa. At the beginning of the twentieth century, cocoa
accounted for 75% of the country's total exports.

Following [World War I](World_War_I "wikilink"), the price of the cocoa
bean fell as countries such as [Ghana](Ghana "wikilink"), [São
Tomé](Sao_Tome_and_Principe "wikilink"), and [Brazil](Brazil "wikilink")
began growing the crop. As cocoa sales declined, a lack of foreign
currency in Ecuador led to severe inflation. In 1914, the Ecuadorian
government passed the "*Ley Moratoria*," which froze exchange rates and
allowed banks to issue currency not backed by gold or silver. This
worsened the country's inflation, which was most felt by the [working
class](Working_Class "wikilink"). By 1922, the country had entered a
state of public unrest.

On the 19th of October, Guayaquil and Quito Railway Company workers
began a strike. The workers - based in the town of Durán, across the
river from Guayaquil–made relatively modest demands such as the payment
of wages on time, the establishment of medical auxiliary posts, payment
in United States dollars or gold rather than the sucre, fifteen days
notice before lay-offs and the re-hiring of fired union organizers. The
railroad company quickly negotiated an end to the strike, granting most
of the workers' demands. The company planned to offset increased wages
by raising fares on the trains, but rate hikes were cancelled by
president José Luis Tamayo.

## Events

Workers in Guayaquil took note of the successes of the railway workers
in Durán. Trolley, electric company and other public utility workers met
in early November and came up with a list of demands including pay
increases, an eight-hour workday, overtime pay, and compliance with
safety regulations. When the demands were rejected, the workers struck.

The strike gained momentum as factories in the city were unable to
operate due to lack of electricity. As negotiations neared completion,
the strikers made new demands, such as artificial exchange rate controls
by the government in order to prop of the value of the sucre. By 13
November, the strike had grown into a citywide general strike.

### Massacre

On the 15th of November, the government came to an agreement with union
leaders on the exchange rate. That same day, a crowd of 20,000 people -
the largest demonstration of the strike yet - assembled in downtown
Guayaquil. Upon hearing that two labor leaders who had been jailed were
to be released, the crowd marched to the [police](police "wikilink")
station. When the demonstrators arrived at the police station, soldiers
began firing into the crowd.

The crowd began to flee, and were pursued by the troops. Many of the
demonstrators were shot to death or stabbed by bayonets. Order was
restored at around 6 pm. At least three hundred people had been killed,
although the precise number is unknown. No soldiers or police were
killed, although several were injured.

## Results

The general strike ended shortly after the massacre. The following day,
president Tamayo signaled that he would sign the exchange rate
moratorium that had been demanded by the strikers. Most workers returned
to their jobs, but the trolley workers continued their strike. On the
21st of November, the trolley worker strike was finally resolved, with
the trolley workers receiving pay raises, shorter hours, and other
demands. However, the trolley company would also increase fares.

## References

[Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") - [1922 Guayaquil general
strike](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1922_Guayaquil_general_strike)

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Ecuador](Category:Ecuador "wikilink") [Category:South
America](Category:South_America "wikilink")
[Category:1922](Category:1922 "wikilink")
[Category:1920s](Category:1920s "wikilink") [Category:20th
Century](Category:20th_Century "wikilink") [Category:General
Strikes](Category:General_Strikes "wikilink")
[Category:Anarcho-Syndicalism](Category:Anarcho-Syndicalism "wikilink")