---
title: Gyeyang Mountain Campaign
permalink: /Gyeyang_Mountain_Campaign/
---

The **Gyeyang Mountain Campaign** was a five-year long ([2006 -
2011](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Eastern_Asia "wikilink"))
[environmentalist](Environmentalism "wikilink") action to protect
Gyeyangsan, [South Korea](South_Korea "wikilink") from damage from [golf
course](Golf "wikilink") development.

## Background

Gyeyangsan is a mountain near the city of Incheon, South Korea that
attracts around 10,000 tourists a day. Gyeyangsan is largely undeveloped
and is home to over 600 endangered species. Since 1989, there have been
four attempts by corporations to develop the slopes of the mountain, but
all plans have been rejected by the regional government. But in June
2006, a proposed golf course on the mountain was made by another
corporation, requiring to removal of many pine trees and leveling a
significant portion of the mountainside.[^1]

## Events

The local Incheon Green Union was outraged by the proposal, and built a
coalition with local churches, non-profit groups and city residents
called the “Citizens’ Committee Against the Planning of Gyeyang Mountain
Golf Course”. Despite the fact that the land for the golf course was
privately owned and the Ministry of Environment didn't want to label the
land as an endangered habitat, despite the many endangered species
living there. The local government refused to inform the citizens
committee of the process, in a manner openly violating
[democratic](Democracy "wikilink") principles.

In response to this, Shin Jeong Eun, a 28-year old woman in the union
began to take direct action. She broke into the site and scaled a 10
meter tall tree and installed a plastic platform for standing and
sleeping (inspired by [Julia Butterfly
Hill](Julia_Butterfly_Hill "wikilink")). She lived in the tree for the
next 56 days as supporters brought her food and supplies. She ended her
occupation in December and Pastor Yun In Jung replaced her, occupying
the tree for 154 days, ending the occupation when he had sudden health
problems. Despite 80% of the city's residents opposing the construction
of the golf course, the government attempted to build it anyway.

The Citizens' Committee began to take new actions, sending a new person
to occupy the tree everyday and hold a [hunger
strike](Hunger_Strike "wikilink"). To have as candlelight vigil in front
of the city hall every wednesday and to submit requests with the
Ministry of Environment to assess the land (which they refused). During
the 2010 election season, they attempt to play off political parties
with eachother to get them to oppose the golf course, and the political
parties saw an opportunity to gain prestige by exploiting this social
movement.[^2]

## Results

The government of Incheon conceded after elections to the protests, and
legally blocked the construction of the golf course, leading to a
three-year long legal battle with the company pushing for its
construction.[^3][^4]

## References

<references />

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Asia](Category:Asia "wikilink") [Category:Eastern
Asia](Category:Eastern_Asia "wikilink")
[Category:2000s](Category:2000s "wikilink")
[Category:2006](Category:2006 "wikilink") [Category:South
Korea](Category:South_Korea "wikilink")
[Category:Environmentalism](Category:Environmentalism "wikilink")
[Category:Social Movements](Category:Social_Movements "wikilink")
[Category:Golf](Category:Golf "wikilink")

[^1]: <https://nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu/content/south-korean-environmentalists-protect-gyeyang-mountain-against-golf-course-development-inch>

[^2]:

[^3]:

[^4]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") (Korean) -
    <https://ko.wikipedia.org/wiki/%EA%B3%84%EC%96%91%EC%82%B0>