---
title: Haining Anti-Pollution Campaign (2011)
permalink: /Haining_Anti-Pollution_Campaign_(2011)/
---

The **Haining Anti-Pollution Campaign** was a grassroots
[environmentalist campaign](Timeline_of_Environmentalism.md "wikilink") in
the city of Haining, [China](China.md "wikilink") against the pollution
created by a local [solar panel](Electricity.md "wikilink")
[factory](factory.md "wikilink") in
[2011](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Eastern_Asia.md "wikilink").

## Background

The JinkoSolar factory near Haining had failed several local pollution
tests and local residents began finding a large quantity of dead fish in
local streams and rivers near the plant. Large chemical discharge did
escape the plant during heavy rain last August. Ensuing water sample
tests showed high levels of fluoride in waters near the plant. Fluoride
can be toxic in high amounts.

## Events

On the 15th of September 2011 local farmers and residents gathered
outside the factory to demand a closure of the factory.
[Police](Police.md "wikilink") tried to repress the protest forcefully
leading to protesters into the factory offices and destroying property,
8 company vehicles and 4 police cars.

## Results

The Chinese Government ordered JinkoSolar to close the plant on 19th of
September, 2011 to investigate the source of pollution and the cause for
the fish deaths. The company as charged a fine and the factory was
closed down.

## References

[Global Nonviolent Action
Database](Global_Nonviolent_Action_Database.md "wikilink") - [Chinese
farmers protest solar panel plant pollution, Haining,
2011](https://nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu/content/chinese-farmers-protest-solar-panel-plant-pollution-haining-2011)

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink")
[Category:China](Category:China.md "wikilink")
[Category:Asia](Category:Asia.md "wikilink") [Category:Eastern
Asia](Category:Eastern_Asia.md "wikilink")
[Category:2011](Category:2011.md "wikilink")
[Category:2010s](Category:2010s.md "wikilink") [Category:21st
Century](Category:21st_Century.md "wikilink")
[Category:Environmentalism](Category:Environmentalism.md "wikilink")