---
title: Hellenophobia
permalink: /Hellenophobia/
---

**Hellenophobia** (also known as **Anti-Greek Sentiment**,
**anti-Hellenism**and **Mishellenism**) refers to
[racism](racism "wikilink"), negative feelings, dislike, hatred,
derision and/or prejudice towards Greeks or people of Greek descent.

## Modern Hellenophobia

### Albania

*Main Article: [Racism in Albania](Racism_in_Albania "wikilink")*

In the Interwar period (1918–39), the Albanian government closed down
Greek schools as part of its policies of assimilation. During the
[Communist rule in Albania (1944–92)](Socialist_Albania "wikilink"), the
government restricted the use of Greek language and Greek names by the
country's Greek minority in an attempt of forced assimilation.
Anti-Greek sentiment dominated the thinking of Enver Hoxha, the
communist leader of Albania, during the [Greek Civil
War](Greek_Civil_War "wikilink").

In post-Communist Albania, "there are no significant explicitly racist
or chauvinist political parties", although, according to James Pettifer,
"there are many individual politicians who adhere to very strong
anti-Greek views, which in turn affects the orientation of virtually all
ethnic Albanian political parties." In a 2013 poll in Albania, Greece
topped the list of countries perceived to be a threat to Albania
(18.5%), although the plurality of respondents (46.4%) agreed with the
statement "No country is a threat to Albania".

### Australia

*Main Article: [Racism in Australia](Racism_in_Australia "wikilink")*

Greeks in [Australia](Australia "wikilink") have been subject to
discrimination. During [World War I](World_War_I "wikilink"), due to
King Constantine I's pro-German sympathies, Greek immigrants were viewed
with hostility and suspicion. Anti-Greek riots occurred in Perth in 1915
and in Kalgoorlie in 1916.

The word "wog" is an ethnic slur used in Australia to refer to Southern
European and Middle Eastern people of the Mediterranean region,
including Greeks. It is also sometimes used against South Asians. The
term has also been adopted and used by Greek Australians to refer to
themselves, including through the sitcom *Acropolis Now* (1989–92), the
television spin-off of the 1987 play *Wogs Out of Work* and the 2000
film *The Wog Boy*.

### Bulgaria

*Main Article: [Racism in Bulgaria](Racism_in_Bulgaria "wikilink")*

In 1906, during the Macedonian Struggle, anti-Greek rallies and violent
attacks took place in a number of Bulgarian cities. In Plovdiv, Greek
Orthodox churches and schools, Greek-owned properties were looted and
plundered. In Pomorie (Anchialos) the Greek population was expelled
after the city was set up on fire and up to 110 Greeks were killed.
Pogroms also took place in Varna, Burgas and other locations. Following
the pogroms, around 20,000 Greeks fled Bulgaria.

### Canada

*Main Article: [Racism in Canada](Racism_in_Canada "wikilink")*

On August 2–5, 1918, a three-day anti-Greek riot occurred in Toronto.
"Mobs of up to 5,000 people, led by war veterans returned from Europe,
marched through the city's main streets waging pitched battles with law
enforcement officers and destroying every Greek business they came
across." The consequence was damages of \$100,000 to Greek businesses
and private property.

### Italy

*Main Article: [Racism in Italy](Racism_in_Italy "wikilink")*

When the Italian Fascists gained power in 1922, they persecuted the
Greek-speakers in Italy.

### Romania

*Main Article: [Racism in Romania](Racism_in_Romania "wikilink")*

As Romanian nationalism grew overtime, a rift grew between Greece and
Romania. In 1892, Romania refused to hand over the property of the
recently deceased Greek expatriate Konstantinos Zappas to the Greek
state citing an article of the Romanian constitution forbidding foreign
nationals from owning agricultural land. The Trikoupis government then
recalled its ambassador in Bucharest, Romania followed suit thus
severing diplomatic relations between the countries. Diplomatic
relations were restored in July 1896, in response to a rise of Bulgarian
komitadji activity in Macedonia. In 1905, the two countries exchanged
accusations regarding the [Vlach Question](Vlach_Question "wikilink").
Romania claimed that Greek armed bands targeted ethnic Romanians in
Macedonia, whereas Greece accused Romania of trying to create a false
equation between Aromanians and Romanians.

Hellenophobic articles began appearing in the Romanian press. On 2
August 1905, the Society of Macedono–Romanian Culture organized an
anti–Greek protest in Bucharest, attended by army officers, student and
Vlachs. After decrying Greek war crimes in Macedonia, the organizers
called for a boycott of Greek products and services. Rioting was
prevented by a large force of Romanian police. On the same day a Greek
owned cafe in Bucharest was vandalized and its owner beaten. Several
days later three editors of the Greek language newspaper Patris were
expelled from the country for sedition. On 13 August, protesters burnt a
Greek flag in Giurgiu. An official remonstrance by the Greek ambassador
Tombazis was rebutted leading to a mutual withdrawal of embassies on 15
September. In November, the Romanian government allocated funding for
the creation of armed Aromanian bands in Macedonia, a parallel motion
closed numerous Greek schools in the country. In February 1906, six
leading members of the Greek community were expelled from the country,
citing their alleged funding of Greek bands in Macedonia. In July 1906,
the Greek government officially severed diplomatic relations with
Romania. In 1911, Greek prime minister Eleftherios Venizelos used the
occasion of the Italo-Turkish War to improve relations with Bulgaria and
Romania, restoring diplomatic relations with the latter.

### Soviet Union

*Main Article: [Racism in the USSR](Racism_in_the_USSR "wikilink")*

Between 1919 and 1924 around 47,000 Greeks emigrated from
[Russia](Russian_Empire "wikilink") to [Greece](Greece "wikilink") as a
result of the official and unofficial anti-Greek sentiment in
[Russia](Russia "wikilink"), which in its turn was a result of the Greek
intervention in the Black Sea region in the [Russian Civil
War](Russian_Civil_War "wikilink") against the
[Bolsheviks](Bolsheviks "wikilink"). Tens of thousands of Greeks were
deported to the remote parts of the Soviet Union during [World War
II](World_War_II "wikilink") in the [Greek Operation of
NKVD](Greek_Operation_(USSR) "wikilink").

### Turkey

*Main Article: [Racism in Turkey](Racism_in_Turkey "wikilink")*

A 2011 survey in Turkey revealed that 67% of respondents had unfavorable
views toward Greeks, although only 6% of Turks said Greece was their
country's main enemy in a poll carried out in the same year. Journalist
Dr. Cenk Saraçoğlu of Ankara University argues that anti-Greek attitudes
in Turkey "are no longer constructed and shaped by social interactions
between the 'ordinary people' Rather, the Turkish media and state
promote and disseminate an overtly anti-Greek discourse." Although
others have argued anti-Greek sentiment is decreasing as appreciation
for Greek culture grows.

During and following [World War I](World_War_I "wikilink"), almost all
of the [Greek population of Anatolia was either
exterminated](Greek_Genocide_(1910s) "wikilink") by the Ottoman
government or later transferred to Greece as part of a population
exchange. In September 1955 the Turkish government sponsored [anti-Greek
riots and pogrom in Istanbul](Istanbul_Pogrom_(1955) "wikilink"). The
[conflict over Cyprus](Cyprus_Conflict "wikilink") kept anti-Greek
feelings in Turkey high. At the height of the intercommunal violence in
Cyprus, thousands of Greeks were expelled from Turkey, mostly Istanbul.
In March of that year all persons (over 6,000) with Greek citizenship
were expelled "on the grounds that they were dangerous to the 'internal
and external' security of the state." Additionally, in September 1964,
10,000 Greeks were expelled. Around 30,000 "Turkish nationals of Greek
descent had left permanently, in addition to the Greeks who had been
expelled." Within months a total of 40,000 Greeks were expelled from
Istanbul.

In 1999 Turkey was again swept by a wave of anti-Greek sentiment,
encouraged by the Turkish government following the capture of the
[Kurdistan Workers' Party](Kurdistan_Workers'_Party "wikilink") leader
[Abdullah Öcalan](Abdullah_Öcalan "wikilink"). However, as a result of
the "earthquake diplomacy" and the subsequent rapprochement efforts
between Greece and Turkey, the public perception of Greece as their main
enemy decreased in Turkey from 29% in 2001 to 16.9% in 2004.

The [Grey Wolves](Grey_Wolves_(Turkey) "wikilink"), a far-right
organization associated with the Nationalist Movement Party (MHP),
routinely demonstrate outside the Ecumenical Patriarchate of
Constantinople in Fener (Phanar), Istanbul and burn the Patriarch in
effigy. In October 2005 they staged a rally and proceeding to the gate
they laid a black wreath, chanting "Patriarch Leave" and "Patriarchate
to Greece", inaugurating the campaign for the collection of signatures
to oust the Ecumenical Patriarchate from Istanbul. As of 2006 the Grey
Wolves claimed to have collected more than 5 million signatures for the
withdrawal of the Patriarch and called on the Turkish government to have
the patriarch deported to Greece.

### United States

*Main Article: [Racism in the USA](Racism_in_the_USA "wikilink")*

In the early 20th century Greeks in the United States were discriminated
against in many ways. In 1904 Greek immigrants, unaware of labor
conditions and largely inexperienced, served as strikebreakers during a
strike in Chicago diesel shops. This fueled anti-Greek sentiment among
union members. Three Greek immigrants were killed during a riot in 1908
in McGill, Nevada. On February 21, 1909, a major anti-Greek riot took
place in South Omaha, Nebraska. The Greek population was forced to leave
the city, while properties owned by Greek migrants were destroyed.
Greeks were viewed with particular contempt in the Mormon stronghold of
Utah. The local press characterized them as "a vicious element unfit for
citizenship and as ignorant, depraved, and brutal foreigners."
Anti-Greek riots occurred in Salt Lake City in 1917 which "almost
resulted" in lynching of a Greek immigrant. In 1922, as a response to
the anti-Greek nativist xenophobia by the [Ku Klux
Klan](Ku_Klux_Klan "wikilink") (KKK), the American Hellenic Educational
Progressive Association (AHEPA) was founded, which sought to Americanize
the Greek immigrant in America.

In December 2014 MTV aired the first episode of its new reality show
*Growing Up Greek*. It was immediately denounced by Greek Americans and
characterized as "stereotype-laden" and "offensive". The American
Hellenic Educational Progressive Association (AHEPA) called for it to be
canceled. Suck my Ass Bitch.

## References

[Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") - [Anti-Greek
sentiment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anti-Greek_sentiment)

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Racism](Category:Racism "wikilink")
[Category:Concepts](Category:Concepts "wikilink")