---
title: Horizontal Economic Planning
permalink: /Horizontal_Economic_Planning/
---

**Horizontal Economic Planning** or **Decentralized Economic Planning**
is is a type of economy in which the investment and allocation of
resources and goods is done accordingly to an economy-wide plan built
and coordinated through a distributed network of disparate economic
agents (ie [community assemblies](Democratic_Assembly "wikilink") and
[confederations](Confederation "wikilink")) production units
([self-managed workplaces](Workers'_Self-Management "wikilink")). It,
alongside the [gift economy](Gift_Economy "wikilink"), is a key theory
in [anarcho-communism](Anarcho-Communism "wikilink").

## Theory

### Calculation in Kind

**Calculation in kind** is a way of valuating resources and a system of
accounting that uses physical attributes such as labor time, weight,
size, material inputs, material outputs and externalities to calculate
the usage and efficiency of a resource. We will develop small working
groups ('communal statistical commissions') that can record information
from areas of production (like mines, factories, farms and workshops)
and consumption (like warehouses and supermarkets) that can then be
visualized in graphs and made [open-source](Open-Source "wikilink").
Such as the number a kind of items consumed, all of which would have
their own physical measurements available for anyone to look up. These
groups would publish this information to be freely available to
[community assemblies](Democratic_Assembly "wikilink") and
[federations](Confederation "wikilink").

When in considering to work on a new project (such as a factory
switching its production) or whether or not to build a railway,
assemblies would look at the various pros and cons of such an endeavor
and allow for the community to collectively decide if such a decision is
worth it based on the communities values.I n addition, common rules of
thumb would possibly be agreed, such as agreements not to use scarce
materials unless there is no alternative (either ones that use a lot of
labour, energy and time to produce or those whose demand is currently
exceeding supply capacity).

When ordering goods from a production outlet, the consumer (which could
be an assembly, another production outlet or even a household or
individual) would have to inform the producer why they want the good.
Allowing for the producer to decide which request is most worthwhile
based on their request. For example, if an individual <em>“needs”</em> a
ship-builders syndicate to build a ship for his personal use, the
ship-builders may not <em>“need”</em> to build it and instead builds
ships for the transportation of freight). However, in almost all cases
of individual consumption, no such information will be needed as
consumption outlets would order consumer goods in bulk as they do now.
Hence the economy would be a vast network of co-operating individuals
and workplaces and the dispersed knowledge which exists within any
society can be put to good effect (<strong>better</strong> effect than
under [capitalism](capitalism "wikilink") because it does not hide
social and ecological costs in the way market prices do and co-operation
will eliminate the [business cycle](Business_Cycle "wikilink") and its
resulting social problems).

Consider two production processes. Method A requires 70 tons of steel
and 60 tons of concrete while Method B requires 60 tons of steel and 70
tons of concrete. Which method should be preferred? One of the methods
will be more economical in terms of leaving more resources available for
other uses than the other but in order to establish which we need to
compare the relevant quantities.

Supporters of capitalism argue that only prices can supply the necessary
information as they are heterogeneous quantities. Both steel and
concrete have a price (say \$10 per ton for steel and \$5 per ton for
concrete). The method to choose is clearly B as it has a lower price
that A (\$950 for B compared to \$1000 for A). However, this does not
actually tell us whether B is the more economical method of production
in terms of minimising waste and resource use, it just tells us which
costs less in terms of money.

Why is this? Simply because, as we argued in section I.1.2, prices do
not totally reflect social, economic and ecological costs. They are
influenced by market power, for example, and produce externalities,
environmental and health costs which are not reflected in the price.
Indeed, passing on costs in the form of externalities and inhuman
working conditions actually are rewarded in the market as it allows the
company so doing to cut their prices. As far as market power goes, this
has a massive influence on prices, directly in terms of prices charged
and indirectly in terms of wages and conditions of workers. Due to
natural barriers to entry (see section C.4), prices are maintained
artificially high by the market power of big business. For example,
steel could, in fact cost \$5 per ton to produce but market power allows
the company to charge \$10 per ton,

Wage costs are, again, determined by the bargaining power of labour and
so do not reflect the real costs in terms of health, personality and
alienation the workers experience. They may be working in unhealthy
conditions simply to get by, with unemployment or job insecurity
hindering their attempts to improve their conditions or find a new job.
Nor are the social and individual costs of hierarchy and alienation
factored into the price, quite the reverse. It seems ironic that an
economy which it defenders claim meets human needs (as expressed by
money, of course) totally ignores individuals in the workplace, the
place they spend most of their waking hours in adult life.

So the relative costs of each production method have to be evaluated but
price does not, indeed cannot, provide an real indication of whether a
method is economical in the sense of actually minimising resource use.
Prices do reflect some of these costs, of course, but filtered through
the effects of market power, hierarchy and externalities they become
less and less accurate. Unless you take the term <em>“economical”</em>
to simply mean <em>“has the least cost in price”</em> rather than the
sensible <em>“has the least cost in resource use, ecological impact and
human pain”</em> you have to accept that the price mechanism is not a
great indicator of economic use.

What is the alternative? Obviously the exact details will be worked out
in practice by the members of a free society, but we can suggest a few
ideas based on our comments above.

When evaluating production methods we need to take into account as many
social and ecological costs as possible and these have to be evaluated.
Which costs will be taken into account, of course, be decided by those
involved, as will how important they are relative to each other (i.e.
how they are weighted). Moreover, it is likely that they will factor in
the desirability of the work performed to indicate the potential waste
in human time involved in production (see section I.4.13 for a
discussion of how the desirability of productive activity could be
indicated in an anarchist society). The logic behind this is simple, a
resource which people <strong>like</strong> to produce will be a better
use of the scare resource of an individual’s time than one people hate
producing.

So, for example, steel may take 3 person hours to produce one ton,
produce 200 cubic metres of waste gas, 2000 kilo-joules of energy, and
has excellent working conditions. Concrete, on the other hand, may take
4 person hours to produce one ton, produce 300 cubic metres of waste
gas, uses 1000 kilo-joules of energy and has dangerous working
conditions due to dust. What would be the best method? Assuming that
each factor is weighted the same, then obviously Method A is the better
method as it produces the least ecological impact and has the safest
working environment — the higher energy cost is offset by the other,
more important, factors.

What factors to take into account and how to weigh them in the decision
making process will be evaluated constantly and reviewed so to ensure
that it reflects real costs and social concerns. Moreover, simply
accounting tools can be created (as a spreadsheet or computer programme)
that takes the decided factors as inputs and returns a cost benefit
analysis of the choices available.

### Supply and Demand

Anarchists do not ignore the facts of life, namely that at a given
moment there is so much a certain good produced and so much of is
desired to be consumed or used. Neither do we deny that different
individuals have different interests and tastes. However, this is not
what is usually meant by <em>“supply and demand.”</em> Often in general
economic debate, this formula is given a certain mythical quality which
ignores the underlying realities which it reflects as well as some
unwholesome implications of the theory. So, before discussing
<em>“supply and demand”</em> in an anarchist society, it is worthwhile
to make a few points about the <em>“law of supply and demand”</em> in
general.

Firstly, as E.P. Thompson argues, <em>“supply and demand”</em> promotes
<em>“the notion that high prices were a (painful) remedy for dearth, in
drawing supplies to the afflicted region of scarcity. But what draws
supply are not high prices but sufficient money in their purses to pay
high prices. A characteristic phenomenon in times of dearth is that it
generates unemployment and empty pursues; in purchasing necessities at
inflated prices people cease to be able to buy inessentials \[causing
unemployment\] ... Hence the number of those able to pay the inflated
prices declines in the afflicted regions, and food may be exported to
neighbouring, less afflicted, regions where employment is holding up and
consumers still have money with which to pay. In this sequence, high
prices can actually withdraw supply from the most afflicted area.”</em>
\[<strong>Customs in Common</strong>, pp. 283–4\]

“As to decisions involving choices of a general nature, such as what
forms of energy touse, which of two or more materials to employ to
produce a particular good, whether tobuild a new factory, there is a ...
technique ... that could be \[used\] ... ‘cost-benefit anal-ysis’ ... in
socialism a points scheme for attributing relative importance to the
variousrelevant considerations could be used ... The points attributed
to these considerationswould be subjective, in the sense that this would
depend on a deliberate social decisionrather than some objective
standard, but this is the case even under capitalism whena monetary
value has to be attributed to some such ‘cost’ or ‘benefit’ ... In the
sensethat one of the aims of socialism is precisely to rescue humankind
from the capitalistfixation with production time/money, cost-benefit
analyses, as a means of taking intoaccount other factors, could
therefore be said to be more appropriate for use in social-ism than
under capitalism. Using points systems to attribute relative importance
in thisway would not be to recreate some universal unit of evaluation
and calculation, butsimply to employ a technique to facilitate
decision-making in particular concrete cases.”\[Adam Buick and John
Crump,State Capitalism: The Wages System Under NewManagement, pp.
138–139

Therefore <em>“the law of supply and demand”</em> may not be the
<em>“most efficient”</em> means of distribution in a society based on
inequality. This is clearly reflected in the <em>“rationing”</em> by
purse which this system is based on. While in the economics books, price
is the means by which scare resources are <em>“rationed”</em> in reality
this creates many errors. Adam Smith argued that high prices discourage
consumption, putting <em>“everybody more or less, but particularly the
inferior ranks of people, upon thrift and good management.”</em> \[cited
by Thompson, <strong>Op. Cit.</strong>, p. 284\] However, as Thompson
notes, <em>“\[h\]owever persuasive the metaphor, there is an elision of
the real relationships assigned by price, which suggests...ideological
sleight-of-mind. Rationing by price does not allocate resources equally
among those in need; it reserves the supply to those who can pay the
price and excludes those who can’t...The raising of prices during dearth
could ‘ration’ them \[the poor\] out of the market altogether.”</em>
\[<strong>Op. Cit.</strong>, p. 285\]

In other words, the market cannot be isolated and abstracted from the
network of political, social and legal relations within which it is
situated. This means that all that <em>“supply and demand”</em> tells us
is that those with money can demand more, and be supplied with more,
than those without. Whether this is the <em>“most efficient”</em> result
for society cannot be determined (unless, of course, you assume that
rich people are more valuable than working class ones
<strong>because</strong> they are rich). This has an obvious effect on
production, with <em>“effective demand”</em> twisting economic activity.
As Chomsky notes, <em>“\[t\]hose who have more money tend to consume
more, for obvious reasons. So consumption is skewed towards luxuries for
the rich, rather than necessities for the poor.”</em> George Barrett
brings home of the evil of such a <em>“skewed”</em> form of production:

Therefore, as far as <em>“supply and demand”</em> is concerned,
anarchists are well aware of the need to create and distribute necessary
goods to those who require them. This, however, cannot be achieved under
capitalism. In effect, supply and demand under capitalism results in
those with most money determining what is an <em>“efficient”</em>
allocation of resources for if financial profit is the sole
consideration for resource allocation, then the wealthy can outbid the
poor and ensure the highest returns. The less wealthy can do without.

However, the question remains of how, in an anarchist society, do you
know that valuable labour and materials might be better employed
elsewhere? How do workers judge which tools are most appropriate? How do
they decide among different materials if they all meet the technical
specifications? How important are some goods than others? How important
is cellophane compared to vacuum-cleaner bags?

It is answers like this that the supporters of the market claim that
their system answers. However, as indicated, it does answer them in
irrational and dehumanising ways under capitalism but the question is:
can anarchism answer them? Yes, although the manner in which this is
done varies between anarchist threads. In a mutualist economy, based on
independent and co-operative labour, differences in wealth would be
vastly reduced, so ensuring that irrational aspects of the market that
exist within capitalism would be minimised. The workings of supply and
demand would provide a more just result than under the current system.

However, collectivist, syndicalist and communist anarchists reject the
market. This rejection often implies, to some, central planning. As the
market socialist David Schweickart puts it, <em>“\[i\]f profit
considerations do not dictate resource usage and production techniques,
then central direction must do so. If profit is not the goal of a
productive organisation, then physical output (use values) must
be.”</em> \[<strong>Against Capitalism</strong>, p. 86\]

However, Schweickart is wrong. Horizontal links need not be market based
and co-operation between individuals and groups need not be
hierarchical. What is implied in this comment is that there is just two
ways to relate to others — namely, by bribery or by authority. In other
words, either by prostitution (purely by cash) or by hierarchy (the way
of the state, the army or capitalist workplace). But people relate to
each other in other ways, such as friendship, love, solidarity, mutual
aid and so on. Thus you can help or associate with others without having
to be ordered to do so or by being paid cash to do so — we do so all the
time. You can work together because by so doing you benefit yourself and
the other person. This is the <strong>real</strong> communist way, that
of mutual aid and free agreement.

So Schweickart is ignoring the vast majority of relations in any
society. For example, love/attraction is a horizontal link between two
autonomous individuals and profit considerations do not enter into the
relationship. Thus anarchists argue that Schweickart’s argument is
flawed as it fails to recognise that resource usage and production
techniques can be organised in terms of human need and free agreement
between economic actors, without profits or central command. This system
does not mean that we all have to love each other (an impossible wish).
Rather, it means that we recognise that by voluntarily co-operating as
equals we ensure that we remain free individuals and that we can gain
the advantages of sharing resources and work (for example, a reduced
working day and week, self-managed work in safe and hygienic working
conditions and a free selection of the product of a whole society). In
other words, a self-interest which exceeds the narrow and impoverished
<em>“egotism”</em> of capitalist society. In the words of John O’Neil:

Thus free agreement and horizontal links are not limited to market
transactions — they develop for numerous reasons and anarchists
recognise this. As George Barret argues:

To make productive decisions we need to know what others need and
information in order to evaluate the alternative options available to us
to satisfy that need. Therefore, it is a question of distributing
information between producers and consumers, information which the
market often hides (or actively blocks) or distorts due to inequalities
in resources (i.e. need does not count in the market, <em>“effective
demand”</em> does and this skews the market in favour of the wealthy).
This information network has partly been discussed in the last section
where a method of comparison between different materials, techniques and
resources based upon use value was discussed. However, the need to
indicate the current fluctuations in production and consumption needs to
be indicated which complements that method.

In a non-Mutualist anarchist system it is assumed that confederations of
syndicates will wish to adjust their capacity if they are aware of the
need to do so. Hence, price changes in response to changes in demand
would not be necessary to provide the information that such changes are
required. This is because a <em>“change in demand first becomes apparent
as a change in the quantity being sold at existing prices \[or being
consumed in a moneyless system\] and is therefore reflected in changes
in stocks or orders. Such changes are perfectly good indicators or
signals that an imbalance between demand and current output has
developed. If a change in demand for its products proved to be
permanent, a production unit would find its stocks being run down and
its order book lengthening, or its stocks increasing and orders falling
... Price changes in response to changes in demand are therefore not
necessary for the purpose of providing information about the need to
adjust capacity.”</em> \[Pat Devine, <strong>Democracy and Economic
Planning</strong>, p. 242\]

To indicate the relative changes in scarcity of a given good it will be
necessary to calculate a <em>“scarcity index.”</em> This would inform
potential users of this good whether its demand is outstripping its
supply so that they may effectively adjust their decisions in light of
the decisions of others. This index could be, for example, a percentage
figure which indicates the relation of orders placed for a commodity to
the amount actually produced. For example, a good which has a demand
higher than its supply would have an index value of 101% or higher. This
value would inform potential users to start looking for substitutes for
it or to economise on its use. Such a scarcity figure would exist for
each collective as well as (possibly) a generalised figure for the
industry as a whole on a regional, “national,” etc. level.

In this way, a specific good could be seen to be in high demand and so
only those producers who <strong>really</strong> required it would place
orders for it (so ensuring effective use of resources). Needless to say,
stock levels and other basic book-keeping techniques would be utilised
in order to ensure a suitable buffer level of a specific good existed.
This may result in some excess supply of goods being produced and used
as stock to buffer out unexpected changes in the aggregate demand for a
good.

Such a buffer system would work on an individual workplace level and at
a communal level. Syndicates would obviously have their inventories,
stores of raw materials and finished goods <em>“on the shelf,”</em>
which can be used to meet excesses in demand. Communal stores, hospitals
and so on would have their stores of supplies in case of unexpected
disruptions in supply. This is a common practice even in capitalism,
although it would (perhaps) be extended in a free society to ensure
changes in supply and demand do not have disruptive effects.

Communes and confederations of communes may also create buffer stocks of
goods to handle unforeseen changes in demand and supply. This sort of
inventory has been used by capitalist countries like the USA to prevent
changes in market conditions for agricultural products and other
strategic raw materials producing wild spot-price movements and
inflation. Post-Keynesian economist Paul Davidson argued that the
stability of commodity prices this produced <em>“was an essential aspect
of the unprecedented prosperous economic growth of the world’s
economy”</em> between 1945 and 1972. US President Nixon dismantled these
buffer zone programmes, resulting in <em>“violent commodity price
fluctuations”</em> which had serious economic effects.
\[<strong>Controversies in Post-Keynesian Economics</strong>, p. 114 and
p. 115\]

Again, an anarchist society is likely to utilise this sort of buffer
system to iron out short-term changes in supply and demand. By reducing
short-term fluctuations of the supply of commodities, bad investment
decisions would be reduced as syndicates would not be mislead, as is the
case under capitalism, by market prices being too high or too low at the
time when the decisions where being made. Indeed, if market prices are
not at their equilibrium level then they do not (and cannot) provide
adequate knowledge for rational calculation. The misinformation conveyed
by dis-equilibrium prices can cause very substantial macroeconomic
distortions as profit-maximising capitalists response to unsustainable
prices for, say, tin, and over-invest in a given branch of industry.
Such mal-invest could spread through the economy, causing chaos and
recession.

This, combined with cost-benefit analysis described in section I.4.4,
would allow information about changes within the <em>“economy”</em> to
rapidly spread throughout the whole system and influence all decision
makers without the great majority knowing anything about the original
causes of these changes (which rest in the decisions of those directly
affected). The relevant information is communicated to all involved,
without having to be order by an <em>“all-knowing”</em> central body as
in a Leninist centrally planned economy. As argued in section I.1.2,
anarchists have long realised that no centralised body could possibly be
able to possess all the information dispersed throughout the economy and
if such a body attempted to do so, the resulting bureaucracy would
effectively reduce the amount of information available to society and so
cause shortages and inefficiencies.

To get an idea how this system could work, let use take the example of a
change in the copper industry. Let use assume that a source of copper
unexpectedly dries up or, what amounts to the same thing, that the
demand for copper increases. What would happen?

First, the initial difference would be a diminishing of stocks of copper
which each syndicate maintains to take into account unexpected changes
in requests for copper. This would help <em>“buffer out”</em> expected,
and short lived, changes in supply or requests. Second, naturally, there
is an increase in demand for copper for those syndicates which are
producing it. This immediately increases the <em>“scarcity index”</em>
of those firms, and so the <em>“scarcity index”</em> for the copper they
produce and for the industry as a whole. For example, the index may rise
from 95% (indicating a slight over-production in respect to current
demand) to 115% (indicating that the demand for copper has risen in
respect to the current level of production).

This change in the <em>“scarcity index”</em> (combined with difficulties
in finding copper producing syndicates which can supply their orders)
enters into the decision making algorithms of other syndicates. This, in
turn, results in changes in their plans (for example, substitutes for
copper may be used as they have become a more efficient resource to
use).

This would aid a syndicate when it determined which method of production
to use when creating a consumer good. The cost-benefit analysis
out-lined in the last section would allow a syndicate to determine the
costs involved between competing productive techniques (i.e. to
ascertain which used up least resources and therefore left the most over
for other uses). Producers would already have an idea of the absolute
costs involved in any good they are planning to use, so relative changes
between them would be a deciding factor.

In this way, requests for copper products fall and soon only reflects
those requests that need copper and do not have realistic substitutes
available for it. This would result in the demand falling with respect
to the current supply (as indicated by requests from other syndicates
and to maintain buffer stock levels). Thus a general message has been
sent across the <em>“economy”</em> that copper has become (relatively)
scare and syndicates plans have changed in light of this information. No
central planner made these decisions nor was money required to
facilitate them. We have a decentralised, non-market system based on the
free exchange of products between self-governing associations.

Looking at the wider picture, the question of how to response to this
change in supply/requests for copper presents itself. The copper
syndicate federation and cross-industry syndicate federations have
regular meetings and the question of the changes in the copper situation
present themselves. The copper syndicates, and their federation, must
consider how to response to these changes. Part of this is to determine
whether this change is likely to be short term or long term. A short
term change (say caused by a mine accident, for example) would not need
new investments to be planned. However, long term changes (say the new
requests are due to a new product being created by another syndicate or
an existing mine becoming exhausted) may need co-ordinated investment
(we can expect syndicates to make their own plans in light of changes,
for example, by investing in new machinery to produce copper more
efficiently or to increase efficiency). If the expected changes of these
plans approximately equal the predicted long term changes, then the
federation need not act. However, if they do then investment in new
copper mines or large scale new investment across the industry may be
required. The federation would propose such plans.

Needless to say, the future can be guessed, it cannot be accurately
predicted. Thus there may be over-investment in certain industries as
expected changes do not materialise. However, unlike capitalism, this
would not result in an economic crisis as production would continue
(with over investment within capitalism, workplaces close due to lack of
profits, regardless of social need). All that would happen is that the
syndicates would rationalise production, close down relatively
inefficient plant and concentrate production in the more efficient ones.
The sweeping economic crises of capitalism would be a thing of the past.

Therefore, each syndicate receives its own orders and supplies and sends
its own produce out. Similarly, communal distribution centres would
order required goods from syndicates it determines. In this way
consumers can change to syndicates which respond to their needs and so
production units are aware of what it is socially useful for them to
produce as well as the social cost of the resources they need to produce
it. In this way a network of horizontal relations spread across society,
with co-ordination achieved by equality of association and not the
hierarchy of the corporate structure. This system ensures a co-operative
response to changes in supply and demand and so reduces the
communication problems associated with the market which help causes
periods of unemployment and economic downturn (see section C.7.2).

While anarchists are aware of the <em>“isolation paradox”</em> (see
section B.6) this does not mean that they think the commune should make
decisions <strong>for</strong> people on what they were to consume. This
would be a prison. No, all anarchists agree that is up to the individual
to determine their own needs and for the collectives they join to
determine social requirements like parks, infrastructure improvements
and so on. However, social anarchists think that it would be beneficial
to discuss the framework around which these decisions would be made.
This would mean, for example, that communes would agree to produce
eco-friendly products, reduce waste and generally make decisions
enriched by social interaction. Individuals would still decide which
sort goods they desire, based on what the collectives produce but these
goods would be based on a socially agreed agenda. In this way waste,
pollution and other <em>“externalities”</em> of atomised consumption
could be reduced. For example, while it is rational for individuals to
drive a car to work, collectively this results in massive
<strong>irrationality</strong> (for example, traffic jams, pollution,
illness, unpleasant social infrastructures). A sane society would
discuss the problems associated with car use and would agree to produce
a fully integrated public transport network which would reduce
pollution, stress, illness, and so on.

Therefore, while anarchists recognise individual tastes and desires,
they are also aware of the social impact of them and so try to create a
social environment where individuals can enrich their personal decisions
with the input of other people’s ideas.

On a related subject, it is obvious that different collectives would
produce slightly different goods, so ensuring that people have a choice.
It is doubtful that the current waste implied in multiple products from
different companies (sometimes the same company) all doing the same job
would be continued in an anarchist society. However, production will be
<em>“variations on a theme”</em> in order to ensure consumer choice and
to allow the producers to know what features consumers prefer. It would
be impossible to sit down beforehand and make a list of what features a
good should have — that assumes perfect knowledge and that technology is
fairly constant. Both these assumptions are of limited use in real life.
Therefore, co-operatives would produce goods with different features and
production would change to meet the demand these differences suggest
(for example, factory A produces a new CD player, and consumption
patterns indicate that this is popular and so the rest of the factories
convert). This is in addition to R&D experiments and test populations.
In this way consumer choice would be maintained, and enhanced as
consumers would be able to influence the decisions of the syndicates as
producers (in some cases) and through syndicate/commune dialogue.

Therefore, anarchists do not ignore <em>“supply and demand.”</em>
Instead, they recognise the limitations of the capitalist version of
this truism and point out that capitalism is based on
<strong>effective</strong> demand which has no necessary basis with
efficient use of resources. Instead of the market, social anarchists
advocate a system based on horizontal links between producers which
effectively communicates information across society about the relative
changes in supply and demand which reflect actual needs of society and
not bank balances. The response to changes in supply and demand will be
discussed in section I.4.8 (<em>What about investment decisions?”</em>)
and section I.4.13 (<em>“Who will do the dirty or unpleasant
work?”</em>) will discuss the allocation of work tasks.

### Investment and Growth

From An Anarchist FAQ:

In a communist-anarchist society, things would be slightly different as
this would not have the labour notes used in mutualism and collectivism.
This means that the collectives would agree that a certain part of their
output and activity will be directed to investment projects. In effect,
each collective is able to draw upon the sums approved of by the Commune
in the form of an agreed claim on the labour power of all the
collectives (investment <em>“is essentially an allocation of material
and labour, and fundamentally, an allocation of human productive
power.”</em> \[Cole, <strong>Op. Cit.</strong>, pp. 144–5\]). In this
way, mutual aid ensures a suitable pool of resources for the future from
which all benefit.

How would this work? Obviously investment decisions have implications
for society as a whole. The implementation of these decisions require
the use of <strong>existing</strong> capacity and so must be the
responsibility of the appropriate level of the confederation in
question. Investment decisions taken at levels above the production unit
become effective in the form of demand for the current output of the
syndicates which have the capacity to produce the goods required. This
would require each syndicate to <em>“prepare a budget, showing its
estimate of requirements both of goods or services for immediate use,
and of extensions and improvements.”</em> \[Cole, <strong>Op.
Cit.</strong>, p. 145\] These budgets and investment projects would be
discussed at the appropriate level of the confederation (in this,
communist-anarchism would be similar to collectivist anarchism).

The confederation of syndicates/communes would be the ideal forum to
discuss (communicate) the various investment plans required — and to
allocate scarce resources between competing ends. This would involve,
possibly, dividing investment into two groups — necessary and optional —
and using statistical techniques to consider the impact of an investment
decision (for example, the use of input-output tables could be used to
see if a given investment decision in, say, the steel industry would
require investment in energy production). In this way social needs
<strong>and</strong> social costs would be taken into account and ensure
that investment decisions are not taken in isolation from one another,
so causing bottle-necks and insufficient production due to lack of
inputs from other industries.

Necessary investments are those which have been agreed upon by the
appropriate confederation. It means that resources and productive
capacity are prioritised towards them, as indicated in the agreed
investment project. It will not be required to determine precisely
<strong>who</strong> will provide the necessary goods for a given
investment project, just that it has priority over other requests. When
a bank gives a company credit, it rarely asks exactly where that money
will be built. Rather, it gives the company the power to command the
labour of other workers by supplying them with credit. Similarly in an
anarcho-communist society, except that the other workers have agreed to
supply their labour for the project in question by designating it a
<em>“necessary investment.”</em> This means when a request arrives at a
syndicate for a <em>“necessary investment”</em> a syndicate must try and
meet it (i.e. it must place the request into its production schedule
before <em>“optional”</em> requests, assuming that it has the capacity
to meet it). A list of necessary investment projects, including what
they require and if they have been ordered, will be available to all
syndicates to ensure such a request is a real one.

Optional investment is simply investment projects which have not been
agreed to by a confederation. This means that when a syndicate or
commune places orders with a syndicate they may not be meet or take
longer to arrive. The project may go ahead, but it depends on whether
the syndicate or commune can find workers willing to do that work. This
would be applicable for small scale investment decisions or those which
other communes/syndicates do not think of as essential.

This we have two inter-related investment strategies. A
communist-anarchist society would prioritise certain forms of investment
by the use of <em>“necessary”</em> and <em>“optional”</em> investment
projects. This socialisation of investment will allow a free society to
ensure that social needs are meet while maintaining a decentralised and
dynamic “economy.” Major projects to meet social needs will be organised
effectively, but with diversity for minor projects. In addition, it will
also allow such a society to keep track of what actual percentage of
resources are being used for investment, so ensuring that current needs
are not sacrificed for future ones and vice-versa.

As for when investment is needed, it is clear that this will be based on
the changes in demand for goods in both collectivist and communist
anarchism. As Guilliame puts it, <em>“\[b\]y means of statistics
gathered from all the communes in a region, it will be possible to
scientifically balance production and consumption. In line with these
statistics, it will also be possible to add more help in industries
where production is insufficient and reduce the number of men where
there is a surplus of production.”</em> \[<strong>Bakunin on
Anarchism</strong>, p. 370\] Obviously, investment in branches of
production with a high demand would be essential and this would be
easily seen from the statistics generated by the collectives and
communes. Tom Brown states this obvious point:

As a rule of thumb, syndicates that produce investment goods would be
inclined to supply other syndicates who are experiencing excess demand
before others, all other things being equal. Because of such guidelines
and communication between producers, investment would go to those
industries that actually required them. In other words, customer choice
(as indicated by individuals choosing between the output of different
syndicates) would generate information that is relevant to investment
decisions.

As production would be decentralised as far as it is sensible and
rationale to do so, each locality/region would be able to understand its
own requirements and apply them as it sees fit. This means that
large-scale planning would not be conducted (assuming that it could work
in practice, of course) simply because it would not be needed.

This, combined with an extensive communications network, would ensure
that investment not only did not duplicate unused plant within the
economy but that investments take into account the specific problems and
opportunities each locality has. Of course, collectives would experiment
with new lines and technology as well as existing lines and so invest in
new technologies and products. As occurs under capitalism, extensive
consumer testing would occur before dedicating major investment
decisions to new products.

In addition, investment decisions would also require information which
showed the different outcomes of different options. By this we simply
mean an analysis of how different investment projects relate to each
other in terms of inputs and outputs, compared to the existing
techniques. This would be in the form of cost-benefit analysis (as
outlined in section I.4.4) and would show when it would make economic,
social and ecological sense to switch industrial techniques to more
efficient and/or more empowering and/or more ecologically sound methods.
Such an evaluation would indicate levels of inputs and compare them to
the likely outputs. For example, if a new production technique reduced
the number of hours worked in total (comparing the hours worked to
produce the machinery with that reduced in using it) as well as reducing
waste products for a similar output, then such a technique would be
implemented.

Similarly with communities. A commune will obviously have to decide upon
and plan civic investment (e.g. new parks, housing and so forth). They
will also have the deciding say in industrial developments in their area
as it would be unfair for syndicate to just decide to build a cement
factory next to a housing co-operative if they did not want it. There is
a case for arguing that the local commune will decide on investment
decisions for syndicates in its area (for example, a syndicate may
produce X plans which will be discussed in the local commune and 1 plan
finalised from the debate). For regional decisions (for example, a new
hospital) would be decided at the appropriate level, with information
fed from the health syndicate and consumer co-operatives. The actual
location for investment decisions will be worked out by those involved.
However, local syndicates must be the focal point for developing new
products and investment plans in order to encourage innovation.

### Regulation of Industry

It is often claimed that with a market producers would ignore the needs
of consumers. Withoutthe threat (and fear) of unemployment and
destitution and the promise of higher profits, produc-157 ers would turn
out shoddy goods. The holders of this argument point to the example of
the SovietUnion which was notorious for terrible goods and a lack of
consumer goods.Capitalism, in comparison to the old Soviet block, does,
to some degree make the producersaccountable to the consumers. If the
producer ignores the desires of the producer then they willloose
business to those who do not and be forced, perhaps, out of business
(large companies,of course, due to their resources can hold out far
longer than smaller ones). Thus we have thecarrot (profits) and the
stick (fear of poverty) — although, of course, the carrot can be used
asa stick against the consumer (no profit, no sale, no matter how much
the consumer may needit). Ignoring the obvious objection to this analogy
(namely we are human beings,notdonkeys!)it does have contain an
important point. What will ensure that consumer needs are meet in
ananarchist society?In an Individualist-Mutualist anarchist system, as
it is based on a market, producers wouldbe subject to market forces and
so have to meet consumers needs. Of course, there are threeproblems with
this system. Firstly, those without money have no access to the goods
producedand so the ill, the handicapped, the old and the young may go
without. Secondly, inequalities maybecome more pronounced as successful
producers drive others out of business. Such inequalitywould skew
consumption as it does in capitalism, so ensuring that a minority get
all the goodthings in life (Individualist anarchists would claim that
this is unlikely, as non-labour incomewould be impossible). Lastly,
there is the danger that the system would revert back to capitalism.This
is because unsuccessful co-operatives may fail and cast their members
into unemployment.This creates a pool of unemployed workers, which (in
turn) creates a danger of wage-labourbeing re-created as successful
firms hire the unemployed but do not allow them to join the
co-operative. This would effectively end self-management and anarchy.
Moreover, the successfulcould hire“protection agencies”(i.e. thugs) to
enforce capitalist ideas of property rights.This problem was recognised
by Proudhon, who argued for an agro-industrial federation toprotect
self-management from the effects of market forces, as well as the
collectivist-anarchists.In both these schemes, self-management would be
protected by agreements between co-operativeworkplaces to share their
resources with others in the confederation, so ensuring that new
work-ers would gain access to the means of life on the same terms as
those who already use it. In thisway wage-labour would be abolished. In
addition, the confederation of workplaces would prac-tice mutual aid and
provide resources and credit at cost to their members, so protecting
firmsfrom failure while they adjust their production to meet consumer
needs.In both these systems producers would be accountable to consumers
by the process of buyingand selling between co-operatives. As James
Guillaume put it, the workers’ associations would“deposit their
unconsumed commodities in the facilities provided by the \[communal\]
Bank of Ex-change ... The Bank of Exchange would remit to the producers
negotiablevouchersrepresenting thevalue of their products”(this
value“having been established in advance by a contractual
agreementbetween the regional co-operative federations and the various
communes”). \[Bakunin on Anar-chism, pp. 366\] If the goods are not in
demand then the producer associations would not be ableto sell the
product of their labour to the Bank of Exchange and so they would adjust
their outputaccordingly. Overtime Guillaume hopes that this system would
evolve into free communism asproduction develops and continually meets
demand \[Op. Cit., p. 368\].While mutualist and collectivist anarchists
can argue that producers would respond to con-sumer needs otherwise they
would not get an income, communist-anarchists (as they seek amoneyless
society) cannot argue their system would reward producers in this way.
So what mech-158anism exists to ensure that“the wants of all”are, in
fact, met? How does anarcho-communismensure that production becomes“the
mere servant of consumption”and“mould itself on the wantsof the
consumer, not dictate to him conditions”? \[Peter Kropotkin,Act for
Yourselves, p. 57\]Libertarian communists argue that in afreecommunist
society consumers’ needs would bemeet. This is because of the
decentralised and federal nature of a communist-anarchist society.So
what is the mechanism which makes producers accountable to consumers in
a libertariancommunist society? Firstly, communes would practice their
power of“exit”in the distributivenetwork. If a syndicate was producing
sub-standard goods or refusing to change their output inthe face of
changing consumer needs, then the communal stores would turn to those
syndicateswhichwereproducing the goods desired. The original syndicates
would then be producing fortheir own stocks, a pointless task and one
few, if any, would do. After all, people generally desiretheir work to
have meaning, to be useful. To just work, producing something no-one
wantedwould be such a demoralising task that few, if any, sane people
would do it (under capitalismpeople put up with spirit destroying work
as some income is better than none, such an“incentive”would not exist in
a free society).As can be seen,“exit”would still exit in libertarian
communism. However, it could be arguedthat unresponsive or inefficient
syndicates would still exist, exploiting the rest of society by
pro-ducing rubbish (or goods which are of less than average quality) and
consuming the productsof other people’s labour, confident that without
the fear of poverty and unemployment theycan continue to do this
indefinitely. Without the market, it is argued, some form of
bureaucracywould be required (or develop) which would have the power to
punish such syndicates. Thusthe state would continue
in“libertarian”communism, with the“higher”bodies using coercionagainst
the lower ones to ensure they meet consumer needs or produced
enough.While, at first glance, this appears to be a possible problem on
closer inspection it is flawed. Thisis because anarchism is based not
only on“exit”but also“voice.”Unlike capitalism, libertariancommunism is
based on association and communication. Each syndicate and commune is in
freeagreement and confederation with all the others. Thus, is a specific
syndicate was producing badgoods or not pulling its weight, then those
in contact with them would soon realise this. First,those unhappy with a
syndicate’s work would appeal to them directly to get their act
together.If this did not work, then they would notify their disapproval
by refusing to“contract”withthem in the future (i.e. they would use
their power of“exit”as well as refusing to provide thesyndicate with any
goodsitrequires). They would also let society as a whole know (via
themedia) as well as contacting consumer groups and co-operatives and
the relevant producer andcommunal confederations which they and the
other syndicate are members of, who would, inturn, inform their members
of the problems (the relevant confederations could include local
andregional communal confederations, the general cross-industry
confederation, its own industrial/communal confederation and the
confederation of the syndicate not pulling its weight). In
today’ssociety, a similar process of“word of mouth”warnings and
recommendations goes on, alongwith consumer groups and programmes. Our
suggestions here are an extension of this commonpractice (that this
process exists suggests that the price mechanism does not, in fact,
provideconsumers with all the relevant information they need to make
decisions, but this is an aside).If the syndicate in question, after a
certain number of complaints had been lodged against it,still did not
change its ways, then it would suffer non-violent direct action. This
would involvethe boycotting of the syndicate and (perhaps) its local
commune with products and investment,so resulting in the syndicate being
excluded from the benefits of association. The syndicate would159face
the fact that no one else wanted to associate with it and suffer a drop
in the goods coming itsway, including consumption products for its
members. In effect, a similar process would occur tothat of a firm under
capitalism that looses its customers and so its income. However, we
doubtthat a free society would subject any person to the evils of
destitution or starvation (as capitalismdoes). Rather, it would provide
a bare minimum of goods required for survival would still beavailable.In
the unlikely event this general boycott did not result in a change of
heart, then two optionsare left available. These are either the break-up
of the syndicate and the finding of its membersnew work places or the
giving/selling of the syndicate to its current users (i.e. to exclude
themfrom the society they obviously do not want to be part off). The
decision of which option to go forwould depend on the importance of the
workplace in question and the desires of the syndicates’members. If the
syndicate refused to disband, then option two would be the most logical
choice(unless the syndicate controlled a scare resource). The second
option would, perhaps, be best asthis would drive home the benefits of
association as the expelled syndicate would have to surviveon its own,
subject to survival by selling the product of its labour and would soon
return to thefold.Kropotkin argued in these terms over 100 years ago. It
is worthwhile to quote him at length:“First of all, is it not evident
that if a society, founded on the principle of free work, werereally
menaced by loafers, it could protect itself without the authoritarian
organisationwe have nowadays, and without having recourse to wagedom
\[or payment by results\]?“Let us take a group of volunteers, combining
for some particular enterprise. Having itssuccess at heart, they all
work with a will, save one of the associates, who is frequentlyabsent
from his post... some day the comrade who imperils their enterprise will
be told:‘Friend, we should like to work with you; but as you are often
absent from your post,and you do your work negligently, we must part. Go
and find other comrades who willput up with your indifference!’“This is
so natural that it is practised everywhere, even nowadays, in all
industries ...\[I\]f \[a worker\] does his work badly, if he hinders his
comrades by his laziness or otherdefects, if he is quarrelsome, there is
an end of it; he is compelled to leave the workshop.“Authoritarian
pretend that it is the almighty employer and his overseers who main-tain
regularity and quality of work in factories. In reality ... it is the
factory itself, theworkmen \[and women\] who see to the good quality of
the work ...“Not only in industrial workshops do things go in this way;
it happens everywhere,every day, on a scale that only bookworms have as
yet no notion of. When a railwaycompany, federated with other companies,
fails to fulfil its engagements, when its trainsare late and goods lie
neglected at the stations, the other companies threaten to cancelthe
contract, and that threat usually suffices.“It is generally believed ...
that commerce only keeps to its engagements from fear oflawsuits.
Nothing of the sort; nine times in ten the trader who has not kept his
word willnot appear before a judge... the sole fact of having driven a
creditor to bring a lawsuitsuffices for the vast majority of merchants
to refuse for good to have any dealings witha man who has compelled one
of them to go to law.160“This being so, why should means that are used
today among workers in the workshop,traders in the trade, and railway
companies in the organisation of transport, not be madeuse of in a
society based on voluntary work?”\[The Conquest of Bread, pp.
152–3\]Thus, to ensure producer accountability of production to
consumption, no bureaucratic bodyis required in libertarian communism
(or any other form of anarchism). Rather, communicationand direct action
by those affected by unresponsive producers would be an effective and
efficientmeans of ensuring the accountability of production to
consumption.

## See Also

- [Lucas Aerospace Plan](Lucas_Aerospace_Plan "wikilink")

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialism](Category:Libertarian_Socialism "wikilink")
[Category:Anarchism](Category:Anarchism "wikilink")
[Category:Anarcho-Communism](Category:Anarcho-Communism "wikilink")
[Category:Communalism](Category:Communalism "wikilink")
[Category:Concepts](Category:Concepts "wikilink")
[Category:Economics](Category:Economics "wikilink")