---
title: Housing Cooperative
permalink: /Housing_Cooperative/
---

**Housing Cooperatives** are buildings and real estate owned and
collectively managed by its [tenants](Tenant "wikilink") without a
[landlord](landlord "wikilink"), often within the context of a
[capitalist](Capitalism "wikilink") economy.

## Research on Housing Cooperatives

Research from Toronto, [Canada](Canada "wikilink") found that housing
cooperatives had residents rate themselves as having the highest quality
of life and housing satisfaction of any housing organisation in the
city.[^1] Other research among older residents from rural
[USA](United_States_of_America "wikilink") found that those living in
housing cooperatives felt much safer, independent, satisfied with life,
had more friends, had more privacy, were healthier and had things
repaired faster.[^2]

[Australian](Australia "wikilink") researchers found that cooperative
housing built stronger social networks and support, as well as better
relationships with neighbours compared to other forms of housing. They
cost 14% less for residents and had lower rates of debt and vacancy.
Other research has found that housing cooperatives tended to have higher
rates of building quality, building safety, feelings of security among
residents, lower crime rates, stable access to housing and significantly
lower costs compared to conventional housing.[^3]

## References

<references />

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Cooperatives](Category:Cooperatives "wikilink")
[Category:Concepts](Category:Concepts "wikilink")

[^1]: ~ Matthew Cooper and Margaret C. Rodman (1994) - [Accessibility
    and Quality of Life in Housing
    Cooperatives](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0013916594261004)

[^2]: ~ Jill Eversole Nolan and Thomas W. Blaine (2001) - [Rural
    Cooperative Housing for Older Adults: An Emerging Challenge for
    Extension Educators](https://www.joe.org/joe/2001april/a3.php)

[^3]: <http://reic.uwcc.wisc.edu/house/>