---
title: Hungarian Revolution (1956)
permalink: /Hungarian_Revolution_(1956)/
---

The **Hungarian Revolution of 1956** was the largest anti-Stalinist
rebellion in history, with rebels successfully topping the Hungarian
government and the revolution was only started by an invasion where the
USSR came from. It's also where the term "tankie" comes from, indicating
someone who supported the USSR's crushing of the rebellion.

## Events

### Protests and Statue Toppling

20,000 protesters on 23 October gathered around a statue of József Bem -
a national hero of Poland and Hungary as Péter Veres, president of the
Writers' Union, read a manifesto to the crowd. Demanding independence,
democratic socialism, joining the UN and civil liberties for all people.
Afterwards the crowd began to chant songs and people waved Hungarian
flags and tore communist emblems down. After being condemned by the
government over radio, the protesters toppled a 9.1m high statue of
Stalin, with Hungarian flags being placed in his boots.

### Mutiny

Protesters gathered around the headquarters of Hungarian Radio, secret
police responded by throwing tear gas at the crowd and shooting live
ammunition into the protest. The secret police hid weapons an ambulance
and tried to resupply, but the crowd stopped them from entering.
Soldiers were sent to crush the protest, but they defected and tore off
the red starts from their caps. Soldiers began to arm the crowd with
supplies from military depots, police cars were set on fire and
government symbols were vandalised.

### Soviet Intervention

The Hungarian government requested assistance of the USSR, who sent the
Red Army to protect the Hungarian Parliament and bridges across the
country. Rebels barricaded numerous neighbourhoods, captured Soviet
tanks, seized the radio headquarters and attacked secret police who were
themselves attacking peaceful protesters outside of a newspaper office.
There were reports of Soviet soldiers also showing open sympathy for the
rebels. Soviet soldiers also accidentally fought in gunfights against
the Hungarian secret police when they tried to shoot protesters, as they
(Soviet soldiers) assumed they were the targets.

### Government Collapse

Most of the Hungarian military remained neutral in the conflict, and
numerous parts defected. Although there were a few dozen cases of rebels
and the military fighting, and in one case a fighter jet bombed a
protest, killing 17 people. Soon, the government collapsed and some
rebels began to attack Soviet troops.

### White Terror and Civil War

Some rebels began to carry out torture and executions of communists,
secret police and military personnel. This soon led to a civil war
between communists (themselves supported by factory workers and
anti-fascist [World War II](World_War_II "wikilink") veterans) and
anti-communist rebels, with the Soviet army acting as a third faction.
Workers' councils and popular assemblies spread across the country and
rebels fought tanks with molotov cocktails. Anti-communist rebels
destroyed public red stars, war memorials, executed communists and
Soviet-sympathisers and communist books were burned. Soviet commanders
often negotiated local cease-fires with the revolutionaries.