---
title: Ifugao
permalink: /Ifugao/
---

**Ifugao** refers to a province of Luzon in the
[Philippines](Philippines "wikilink") that had been governed by a
[semi-anarchist political
system](List_of_Libertarian_Socialist_Societies "wikilink") for two
thousand years and developed the
[sustainable](Sustainability "wikilink") [Banaue Rice
Terraces](Agriculture "wikilink"), often considered the Eighth Wonder of
the World.

## History

Ifuago was first settled around
[500BCE](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Southeast_Asia "wikilink"),
and building up itself over the next 2000 years through a complex web of
agriculture, housing and a decentralised, self-governing structure.
During the [Spanish Colonisation of the
Philippines](Spanish_Colonisation_of_the_Philippines "wikilink")
(beginning in 1521) it took hundreds of years for Ifugao to fall under
Spanish control as the people fiercely resisted colonisation. The
province remained relatively untouched during the Philippine Revolution,
American Colonisation and [World War II](World_War_II "wikilink"), after
indepedence, it became a haven for tourists, anthropologists and
archeologists.[^1]

## Decision-Making

Villages hardly exist; rather houses are scattered, sometimes with a
cluster of a dozen or so in one place. These can be seen as
self-governing neighbourhoods (they also lacked a
[state](State_(Polity) "wikilink"), [police](police "wikilink") and
[law](Law_(Statism) "wikilink")). There is a unique class system, with
wealthy men on top (called kadangyang) who are granted this status in
recognition of their sponsoring of feasts and mediating disputes. They
mediate disputes in families, houses and between villages and often buys
and sells resources in the community. Despite this, he has no authority
and does not act as a [police force](Police "wikilink"), and is only has
as much power as he is granted.[^2]

## Crime

Most disputes are resolved through fines that must be agreed upon by
both parties. If one side refuses to pay a fine, then the other is
permitted to steal from them. Otherwise, disputes are resolved through
various contests like egg throwing, wrestling matches and marriages. The
death penalty is used in extreme cases such as murder.[^3] However,
almost all disputes were resolved peacefully.[^4]

## Economy

### Food Production

Food production in Ifugao was based around mountain gardens of rice and
taro as well as raising chickens and pigs. Rice is stored in granaries
and used to produce rice wine and rice cakes and *moma* (a mixture of
several herbs, powdered snail shell and betel nut/arecoline which is
used as a chewing gum to the Ifugaos.[^5] Most people own enough land to
provide for themselves and if they don't they perform favours for others
to survive (a sort of proto-capitalist market).[^6] Ifugao agriculture
was considered the best in Asia at the time.

The Banaue Rice Terraces were carved into the mountains of Ifugao and
are occasionally called the "Eighth Wonder of the World". It is commonly
thought that the terraces were built with minimal equipment, largely by
hand. The terraces are located approximately 1,500 metres (4,900 feet)
above sea level. These are fed by an ancient irrigation system from the
rainforests above the terraces. It is said that if the steps were put
end to end, it would encircle half of the globe.[^7]

The Rice Terraces of the Philippine Cordilleras is a similar structure,
employing early hydraulic engineering. Maintenance of the living rice
terraces reflects a primarily cooperative approach of the whole
community which is based on detailed knowledge of the rich diversity of
biological resources existing in the Ifugao agro-ecosystem, a finely
tuned annual system respecting lunar cycles, zoning and planning,
extensive soil conservation, and mastery of a complex pest control
regime based on the processing of a variety of herbs, accompanied by
religious rituals.[^8]

### Housing

Ifugao housing has been described as: "Square in floor plan, it is
elevated to about shoulder height by four posts (*tukud*), around which
are fitted cynlindrical wooden rat-guards (*halipan*), carrying two
transverse girders (*kuling*) which support three floor joists into
which the floorboards (*dotal*) are fitted and wallboards (*goab* and
*pamadingan*) and studs (*bagad*) are mortised. The four studs, placed
at the corner of the house, are mortised at their upper end into four
tie-beans or purlins (*wanan*) which form a square to carry much of the
weight of the roof as well as the central crossbeam (*pumpitolan*) on
which stand two queenposts (*taknang*). These queenposts terminate in a
small square (*ambubulan*) which supports the upper ends of the rafters
(*bughol*), the roof being a true pyramid in form with four triangular
sides and thus rising to an apex without any ridgepole. The wallboards
are rabbeted into a transverse beam (*huklub*) at waist or chest height,
at which point a shelf (*patie*) is fitted between them and the roof,
whose eaves descend as low as the level of the floor. Above the tie
beams a reed floor or platform is often fitted to make an attic-like
storage space (*palan*) for unthreshed rice. Wooden panels close
doorways on two opposite sides of the house, and entrance is gained by
means of a ladder which is removed at night. This type of house is
called *bale* (or *fale*), but the same basic building with a few
modifications - the wallboards extend up to the roof, there is only one
door, and the whole thing is smaller - serves as a rat-proof granary
(*alang*)."[^9]

## Culture

People commonly identify with family centered around several households.
But there is also a unique class system, with wealthy men on top (called
kadangyang) who are granted this status in recognition of their
sponsoring of feasts and mediating disputes. Ifugao men and women have
fairly equal relationships. Both man and wife bring to their marriage an
equal amount of property and they also work side by side in the
fields.[^10]

## See Also

- [Highland New Guinea](Highland_New_Guinea "wikilink")

## References

<references />

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Societies](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Societies "wikilink")
[Category:Past Libertarian Socialist
Societies](Category:Past_Libertarian_Socialist_Societies "wikilink")
[Category:Southeast Asia](Category:Southeast_Asia "wikilink")
[Category:Asia](Category:Asia "wikilink")
[Category:Philippines](Category:Philippines "wikilink") [Category:Before
Common Era](Category:Before_Common_Era "wikilink")

[^1]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") -
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ifugao#History>

[^2]: [Harold Barclay](Harold_Barclay "wikilink") (1990) - [People
    Without Government: An Anthropology of
    Anarchy](People_without_Government:_An_Anthropology_of_Anarchy "wikilink")

[^3]:

[^4]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") -
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ifugao#Precolonial_age>

[^5]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") -
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ifugao#Rice_culture>

[^6]:

[^7]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") -
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Banaue_Rice_Terraces>

[^8]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") -
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rice_Terraces_of_the_Philippine_Cordilleras>

[^9]:

[^10]: