---
title: Ivan Balev
permalink: /Ivan_Balev/
---

**Ivan Tsvetkov Balev** was a [doctor](Healthcare "wikilink") and
[anarchist](Anarchism "wikilink").

## Life

Born into a family of [peasants](peasants "wikilink") in
[Bulgaria](Bulgaria "wikilink"), he would often help sheperd animals and
often read books on his families farm. He became an anarchist as a
teenager and tried to study to become a teacher but was expelled for his
anarchist beliefs, before eventually becoming a doctor. He got married
in 1925 and had two daughters, moving to Vienna in 1927 to study
medicine. He helped establish cooperatives in
[Austria](Austria "wikilink") and [France](France "wikilink"), and used
his own passport to smuggle three persecuted anarchists out of Bulgaria.

He befriended [Nestor Makhno](Nestor_Makhno "wikilink") and suggested he
move to Bulgaria for his health. But Makhno declined due to the many
exiled White veterans from the [Russian Civil
War](Russian_Civil_War "wikilink") in Bulgaria. He then returned to
Bulgaria and became a specialist in urology and radiology, and created
an anarchist doctors union. He wanted to fight in the [Spanish Civil
War](Spanish_Civil_War "wikilink") with the
[CNT](National_Confederation_of_Labour_(Spain) "wikilink") in 1936, but
stayed in Bulgaria for his family, staying to give public speeches on
anarchism that were popular with local workers and students.

In 1939 he was arrested and conscripted into World War II as a combat
medic, then jailed for three years, then conscripted again. Here he
learnt how to speak English, French, German, Spanish and Turkish. He was
also described as strong, fit and hardworking.

After the war ended, he became a surgeon, orthopaedist (bone doctor) and
was much admired by his patients for his kindness and care. He was next
in line to be the First Surgeon of Bulgaria and assisted [Paraskev
Stoyanov](Paraskev_Stoyanov "wikilink"). But in 1948 he was arrested by
the Stalinist secret police and tortured for four months, and forced to
work in a concentration camp. He was denied letters from his family and
aids for his telling of anti-government jokes and refusal to teach new
prisoners about the 'New Soviet Man' propaganda to prisoners. He was
released in 1953, and worked in the urological ward at a hospital in
Shumen for 24 years, returning to Sofia in 1976 and dying in 1981.[^1]

## References

<references />

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialists](Category:Libertarian_Socialists "wikilink")
[Category:Anarchists](Category:Anarchists "wikilink")
[Category:Bulgaria](Category:Bulgaria "wikilink") [Category:Southern
Europe](Category:Southern_Europe "wikilink") [Category:Eastern
Europe](Category:Eastern_Europe "wikilink")
[Category:Europe](Category:Europe "wikilink")
[Category:Doctors](Category:Doctors "wikilink")

[^1]: `         `[`Balev, Ivan Tsvetkov (1900-1981)`](https://libcom.org/history/balev-ivan-tsvetkov-1900-1981)` - libcom.org`
    `       `