---
title: January Storm (China)
permalink: /January_Storm_(China)/
---

*Not to be confused with January revolutions and uprisings in
[Egypt](Egyptian_Revolution_(2011).md "wikilink") (2011),
[Germany](Sparticist's_Uprising.md "wikilink") (1918), Ukraine or Poland
(1863)*

The **January Storm** (or **January Revolution**) was an attempt to turn
Shanghai into a [libertarian socialistish
community](Libertarian_Socialism.md "wikilink") during the [Cultural
Revolution](Cultural_Revolution_(China).md "wikilink") in
[China](China.md "wikilink") in
[1967](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Eastern_Asia.md "wikilink").

## Background

As the Cultural Revolution gained momentum in 1966, it became evident
that Chairman Mao Zedong and his Maoist followers in Beijing had
underestimated the ability of local party organizations to resist the
attacks from Red Guards. By the end of 1966 many regional party
groupings had survived by paying lip service to Maoist teachings while
countering the attacks of local Maoists.<sup>\[2\]</sup>

To break the stalemate which had begun to form, Maoist leaders called
for the "seizure of power by proletarian revolutionaries", a concept
originally mentioned in the Sixteen Articles (a statement of the aims of
the Cultural Revolution approved at the 11th Plenum of the Communist
Party of China in August 1966). Shanghai was chosen as the first place
where this "seizure" would be attempted.

Shanghai's experience of the Cultural Revolution had begun in the summer
of 1966 with the formation of Red Guard groups proclaiming their loyalty
to Chairman Mao. The movement quickly became heavily factionalized (as
was the norm), but also rapidly developed very radical tendencies, with
attacks on the authority of the city's mayor and physical attacks on
government buildings.<sup>\[3\]</sup> By the autumn of the same year,
the spirit of rebellion had spread from the city's schools to the
factories, and there soon followed the creation of many different
worker-based groups. In November, several of these groups proceeded to
form an alliance (the 'Headquarters of the Revolutionary Revolt of
Shanghai Workers') led by Wang Hongwen.

By this point, the Cultural Revolution in Shanghai was proceeding at a
rapid pace. On 8 November, the Worker's Headquarters presented a list of
demands to the Shanghai Municipal Party Committee demanding the
replacement of the old "bureaucracy" with new organs that had widespread
support. These demands were refused, but two days later a large number
of workers seized a train to Beijing, with the intention of presenting
their demands personally to Mao. The train was intercepted at Anting
(several miles from Shanghai). Nearly half of the workers remained on
board, refusing to return to Shanghai, turning the situation into a
three-day siege.

The response from the Maoist leaders in Beijing was one of caution.
Their first response was to send a telegram stating the seriousness of
disobeying Party instructions, but before the order could be implemented
a second message from the leadership was personally conveyed by Zhang
Chunqiao (a leading member of the Cultural Revolution Group) to Anting,
and he proceeded to grant the Worker's Headquarters legal status and
cede to them all of their demands.<sup>\[4\]</sup> The event signaled
the exhaustion of the established apparatus' last political capital.

It was in this situation that the attempt to seize power would be
conducted in early January 1967.

## Establishment

On 5 January 1967, a dozen groups allied with the Worker's Headquarters
grouping published a "Message to all the People of Shanghai" in the
city's main newspaper, calling for unity in the workers' movement. The
next day over one million people gathered in the city's main square to
see a televised mass meeting, in which the city's officials were
denounced and removed from their positions. This marked the fall of the
old established apparatus. The now leaderless old apparatus was taken
over by Zhang Chunqiao who came again to Shanghai with his colleague Yao
Wenyuan to restore order. The pair proceeded to strike a deal with Wang
Hongwen to guarantee the support of the Worker's
Headquarters<sup>\[5\]</sup> and, with the support of the People's
Liberation Army, order had been restored to Shanghai by the end of
January.

However, the unity that had existed early in January was not to last.
While the Scarlet Guards (another worker grouping who were rivals of the
Worker's Headquarters) proceeded to pledge their support to the new
leadership, the more radical groups involved in the January revolution
moved into a position of opposition, fearing that the new apparatus was
of little difference to the old bureaucracy. By the end of January and
the beginning of February, these groups had taken up arms again, and the
factional fighting that had dominated the previous year was resumed.

To secure the support of all the major groups, Zhang promised the
introduction of a model based on the Paris Commune, a measure that
quickly gained popular approval (all the groups mutually despised
dictatorships). On 5 February 1967, the Shanghai Commune was formally
proclaimed with Zhang Chunqiao as the head of the new organisation, but
the movement was to be short-lived and marred with difficulty.

## Fall

Although the Shanghai Commune was based on Paris Commune model with a
"self government of producers", the Shanghai equivalent varied in
several meaningful ways. Zhang Chunqiao and Yao Wenyuan derived their
authority from Peking and Mao Zedong rather than the proletariat of
Shanghai, leading to the questioning of the legitimacy of their
leadership. Finally, Zhang's political opponents in Shanghai were soon
excluded from the leadership of the Commune, driving several groups to
establish a rival 'New Shanghai People's Commune' almost immediately
after the first one's formation.

Meanwhile, in Peking, the concept of 'revolutionary committees' (triple
alliances between the PLA, cadres, and workers) had attracted Mao as the
best organ of local government to replace the old apparatus with. As a
result, in an audience with Zhang Chunqiao and Yao Wenyuan in
mid-February, Mao suggested the transformation of the Shanghai Commune
into a revolutionary committee.<sup>\[6\]</sup> On 24 February, in a
televised speech to the people of Shanghai, Zhang announced the now
non-existence of the Shanghai Commune, and in the subsequent weeks the
'Revolutionary Committee of the Municipality of Shanghai' was
established in the city.

All in all, the Shanghai Commune had lasted less than a month.