---
title: Judi Bari
permalink: /Judi_Bari/
---

**Judi Bari** (1949 - 1997) was an [anarchist](Anarchism.md "wikilink"),
[environmentalist](Environmentalism.md "wikilink") and
[feminist](Feminism.md "wikilink") involved
[IWW](Industrial_Workers_of_the_World.md "wikilink") and [Earth
First!](Earth_First!.md "wikilink") [organizer](organizer.md "wikilink"),
activist notable for her efforts to organize [Redwood
Summer](Redwood_Summer.md "wikilink"), an effort to unite timber workers
and environmentalists to protect forests in Northern California, and her
ideas became the precursor of [Green
Syndicalism](Green_Syndicalism.md "wikilink").

## Life

### Family

The daughter of a famous mathematician and a diamond settler. Her
grandparents were Polish-Jewish and Italian immigrants to the United
States of America.

## Assassination Attempt

On the 24th of May, 1990, a car she was driving around Oakland,
California had a pipe bomb explode under her seat, seriously injuring
her and placing her in critical condition.
[FBI](Federal_Bureau_of_Investigation.md "wikilink") bomb squads and
Oakland police rapidly descended on the scene and she was accused of
carrying explosives, which was dismissed by the district attorney and
herself for insufficient evidence. This led to multiple conspiracy
theories about who really planted the bomb.

### Theory 1: Far-Right Terrorists

Five days after the bombing, a journalist recieved an anonymous letter
claiming responsibility for the bombing signed by 'The Lord's Avenger'.

Just five days after the bombing, on May 29, while Bari was still in
hospital, Mike Geniella of the Santa Rosa *Press Democrat* received a
letter claiming responsibility for placing the bomb in Bari's car and at
the Cloverdale mill. It was written in an ornate, biblical style with
heavily misogynistic language and signed "The Lord's
Avenger,"<sup>\[35\]</sup> stating further that the letter writer's
motivation was outrage at Bari's offense against his religious
sensibilities during an anti-abortion protest at a Planned Parenthood
clinic in Ukiah, California in December 1988. The letter also described
the construction of the two bombs in great detail. The bomb in the
Cloverdale sawmill included a pipe bomb and a can of gasoline, but it
failed to ignite and did no damage. The other bomb was in Bari's
vehicle.<sup>\[36\]</sup> The letter focused suspicion on Bill Staley, a
former professional football player and self-styled preacher who had
been at the demonstration. Staley was eventually cleared of suspicion in
the bombing. The detailed description of the bombs tied the letter's
author to the construction of the bomb, however, the author's
explanation of when and where the bomb was placed in Bari's car was
found to be implausible. The author claimed to have placed the bomb
during an event when Bari's car was parked on a busy street and the
location of which was not widely disseminated. The author claimed an
implausible malfunction of the timing mechanism to explain the delay
between the claimed time of bomb placement and its detonation. It was
decided among both supporters and detractors of Bari's favored theory of
the bombing that the letter was sent by the bomb builder in an effort to
divert attention to Staley.<sup>\[3\]\[16\]</sup>

### Theory 2: Darryl Cherney

### Theory 3: Her Ex-Husband

### Theory 4: The FBI

Several people have speculated that the bombing was planted by the
[FBI](Federal_Bureau_of_Investigation.md "wikilink") as a continuation of
[COINTELPRO](COINTELPRO.md "wikilink"). The evidence includes:

- The FBI's claim that the bombing was an accidental detonation was
  shown to be completely implausible in the face of physical evidence.
- There was a close resemblance of the bombing of Bari's car to "crime
  scenes" fabricated by the FBI in a "bomb school" held in redwood
  country earlier that year.
- Those same schools taught that bomb explosions inside a vehicle were
  not likely to involve targets of bombing but indicated the knowing,
  criminal transportation of homemade bombs. This was said to be because
  it was difficult to break into a locked car to plant a bomb.
- Judi had received numerous death threats citing her activism in the
  weeks before the bombing. She had reported them to local police, and
  after the bombing, Bari's attorney turned written threats over to the
  FBI for investigation. The local police and the FBI never
  investigated, court evidence later showed.
- Judi had suspected that several people in Earth First! were FBI
  informants.
- The FBI has a history of killing left-wing activists in the US.

## Death

Judi died of breast cancer on the 2nd of March, 1997 at her home in
Willits, California, USA.

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialism](Category:Libertarian_Socialism.md "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialists](Category:Libertarian_Socialists.md "wikilink") [Category:Earth
First!](Category:Earth_First!.md "wikilink")
[Category:IWW](Category:IWW.md "wikilink") [Category:North
America](Category:North_America.md "wikilink")
[Category:USA](Category:USA.md "wikilink")
[Category:Environmentalists](Category:Environmentalists.md "wikilink")
[Category:Feminism](Category:Feminism.md "wikilink")
[Category:Environmentalism](Category:Environmentalism.md "wikilink")
[Category:Feminists](Category:Feminists.md "wikilink")
[Category:Anarchists](Category:Anarchists.md "wikilink")
[Category:Anarchism](Category:Anarchism.md "wikilink") [Category:Green
Syndicalism](Category:Green_Syndicalism.md "wikilink")