---
title: Kaiserreich (Video Game)
permalink: /Kaiserreich_(Video_Game)/
---

**Kaiserreich** is a mod for the game Hearts of Iron IV, taking place in
an alternate 1936 where the German Empire won the First World War,
leading to dramatic changes across the world, notably the rise of
popularity of [syndicalism](syndicalism "wikilink") as the dominant
philosophy of revolutionaries, not communism. Praised for its realistic
and interesting alternate history scenario

## Lore

The notable point of divergence from our history is that Germany refused
to use unrestricted submarine warfare after the sinking of Lusitania in
1915, and British submarines sank a US ship taking Christmas supplies to
Germany. This leads to the US never entering the war, and the blockade
being lifted on Germany. Allowing Germany to force France into defeat by
1919 (through a combination of CGT-led strikes, mutinies and military
defeats) and eventually end the war in 1922.

In Russia, German intervention in the [Russian Civil
War](Russian_Civil_War "wikilink") destroys the [Black
Army](Black_Army_(Ukraine) "wikilink") and [Free
Territory](Free_Territory_of_Ukraine "wikilink") in Ukraine and
ultimately captures Moscow, defeating [Trotsky](Leon_Trotsky "wikilink")
([Lenin](Vladimir_Lenin "wikilink") had been assassinated in 1918 by
[Fanny Kaplan](Fanny_Kaplan "wikilink"))

## Countries

### Africa

### Asia

### Europe

### North America

### Oceania

### South America

[Category:Video Games](Category:Video_Games "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Alternate History](Category:Alternate_History "wikilink")