---
title: Kenyan General Strike (1947)
permalink: /Kenyan_General_Strike_(1947)/
---

The **Kenyan General Strike of 1947** was a [general
strike](List_of_General_Strikes "wikilink") in [Kenya](Kenya "wikilink")
(mainly the city of Mombosa) in
[1947](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Eastern_Africa "wikilink").

## Background

Kenya, then a colony of the [British Empire](British_Empire "wikilink"),
saw a massive underpaid lower class who were frustrated with a lack of
change.

## Events

On the 7th of January, 3,000 workers met to organize a strike and on the
13th of January 1947, 15,000 workers declared a general strike. 75% of
people didn't show up to work in Mombosa, mainly government workers,
railroad workers, hotel workers, domestic servants, 4,000 dockworkers
(dockers), and many others. Taxi drivers went around the city spreading
word of the strike and urging others to participate.

The government immediately declared the strike illegal, citing the
Defense Regulations, which made it necessary for the port at Mombasa to
stay open, as it was the only major access site to Kenya Colony and
[Uganda](Uganda "wikilink"), then known as the Uganda Protectorate.
Government threats did not stop workers. Every day strikers met at a
soccer field to organize. On the 14th of January, 10,000 workers showed
up to the daily meeting, [which was run with no official leader, giving
everyone an opportunity to speak.](Democratic_Assembly "wikilink") Soon
the meetings resulted in the formation of the African Workersâ€™ Union.
The people appointed 12 executive committee members. The next day, the
government arrested 421 strikers, in response, barbers shaved the heads
of 12 strikebreakers into strange shapes before a large crowd. Despite
threatening legal action against the strikers, the government soon
backed down.

## Results

The strike ensured a wage increase of at least 20% for workers (some
workers got an increase of 40%!) and workers were given housing
allowances, paid holidays and paid overtime. The African Workers' Union
attempted to organise a second strike to win more demands, but failed as
it lost enthusiasm.

## References

[Global Nonviolent Action
Database](Global_Nonviolent_Action_Database "wikilink") - [15,000
workers strike, win wage increases in Mombasa, Kenya Colony January
1947](https://nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu/content/15000-workers-strike-win-wage-increases-mombasa-kenya-colony-january-1947)

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Africa](Category:Africa "wikilink") [Category:Eastern
Africa](Category:Eastern_Africa "wikilink") [Category:British
Empire](Category:British_Empire "wikilink")
[Category:Kenya](Category:Kenya "wikilink")
[Category:1947](Category:1947 "wikilink")
[Category:1940s](Category:1940s "wikilink") [Category:20th
Century](Category:20th_Century "wikilink") [Category:General
Strikes](Category:General_Strikes "wikilink")