---
title: Khimki Forest Campaign
permalink: /Khimki_Forest_Campaign/
---

The **Khimki Forest Campaign** was a failed effort by
[environmentalists](Environmentalism.md "wikilink") in
[Russia](Russia.md "wikilink") to stop the deforestation of Khimki Forest
for highway construction in
[2010](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Eastern_Europe.md "wikilink").

## Events

Residents of Khimki discovered trees with red markings that the
government planned to burn them down to build a new highway to connect
Moscow and St. Petersburg. Led by 33-year old mother and university
graduate Yevgenia Chriikova, the group "Defenders of Khimki Forest" held
a round-the-clock vigil outside the logging site to protest and rallies
were held in downtown Khimki, there was also a 20,000-signature
petintion to the French company heading the project. One night masked
men attacked the group and forced several to hospital. In response,
protesters wore masks and threw molotovs, vandalised buildings and
graffitied messages in opposition to the plans.

## Results

Roughly two months after the protests began, construction was halted.
However, only four short months later, construction on the highway would
resume.

## References

[Global Nonviolent Action
Database](Global_Nonviolent_Action_Database.md "wikilink") - [Russians
campaign to save Khimki Forest,
2010](https://nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu/content/russians-campaign-save-khimki-forest-2010)

[Category:Events](Category:Events.md "wikilink") [Category:Libertarian
Socialist Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink")
[Category:Russia](Category:Russia.md "wikilink")
[Category:Europe](Category:Europe.md "wikilink") [Category:Eastern
Europe](Category:Eastern_Europe.md "wikilink") [Category:Northern
Asia](Category:Northern_Asia.md "wikilink")
[Category:Asia](Category:Asia.md "wikilink")
[Category:2010](Category:2010.md "wikilink")
[Category:2010s](Category:2010s.md "wikilink")
[Category:Environmentalism](Category:Environmentalism.md "wikilink")
[Category:Anti-Roads
Campaigns](Category:Anti-Roads_Campaigns.md "wikilink")