---
title: Louise Michel
permalink: /Louise_Michel/
---

**Louise Michel** (1830 - 1905) was an
[anarchist](Anarchism "wikilink"),
[feminist](Anarcha-Feminism "wikilink"), schoolteacher, poet and
important figure of the [Paris Commune](Paris_Commune "wikilink").

## Life

Louise Michel was raised by her mother and paternal grandparents. Her
love and understanding of everything downtrodden, human and animal
alike, developed from her empathy with her childhood world. Her
compassion and sensitivity to suffering grew, as she grew. This, along
with her instinct to rebel against social inequalities, led her along
the revolutionary path.

In January 1853 she took a position as a schoolmistress at Audelancourt.
In the time she was teaching there, she constantly dreamed of going to
Paris. When she did move there, she concentrated on teaching, on writing
poetry and reading. In the little free time she had left, she attended
lectures on physics, chemistry and law. These courses helped to quench
her thirst for knowledge. While walking home at night through the
streets of Paris, she began to see more of the impoverished victims of
Parisian society. During the Franco-Prussian War she was arrested for
organising a volunteer militia to against the Prussians. Upon her
release a few weeks later, she provided food and shelter and organised
protests. During the [Paris Commune](Paris_Commune "wikilink"), she gave
herself completely to the revolution, but the commune failed and she
turned herself in to prevent her mother being executed. She was marched,
along with other prisoners who were active in the commune, from
Versailles to Satory. Along the way some were woken in the middle of the
night, made dig their own graves and then shot. In total, there were
about thirty thousand men, women and children executed. She was spared
and deported to [New Caledonia](New_Caledonia "wikilink"), meeting
[Natalie Lemel](Natalie_Lemel "wikilink") who introduced her to
anarchism. She began to advocate for indigenous self-determination and
revolution in New Caldeonia, and was granted amnesty in 1880 and
returned to Paris.

[Category:Anarchism](Category:Anarchism "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Anarchists](Category:Anarchists "wikilink")
[Category:Anarcha-Feminism](Category:Anarcha-Feminism "wikilink")
[Category:Anarcha-Feminists](Category:Anarcha-Feminists "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialism](Category:Libertarian_Socialism "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialists](Category:Libertarian_Socialists "wikilink")
[Category:France](Category:France "wikilink") [Category:Western
Europe](Category:Western_Europe "wikilink")
[Category:Europe](Category:Europe "wikilink") [Category:Paris
Commune](Category:Paris_Commune "wikilink")