---
title: Madagascan Democracy Movement
permalink: /Madagascan_Democracy_Movement/
---

The **Madagascan Democracy Movement** was a social movement which aimed
to overthrow Madagascar's authoritarian government and create a
[liberal](Liberalism "wikilink") democracy that began in
[1989](Revolutions_of_1989_-_1992 "wikilink") and [succeeded in
1991](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Southern_Africa "wikilink").

## Background

Madagascar [became independent](Decolonisation "wikilink") from the
[French Empire](French_Empire "wikilink") in 1960 after [nearly 70 years
under French rule](Timeline_of_French_Imperialism "wikilink"). The
government quickly became an authoritarian socialist state that
[nationalised](Nationalisation "wikilink") banks, mines, insurance
companies in addition to carrying out repression and media censorship.
By the 1980s the government reversed and carried out neoliberal reforms
outlined by the IMF leading to even greater poverty and disease
outbreaks (one malaria outbreak caused by a loss of funding for mosqutio
nets in beds killed 10,000 people), with the government more or less
[abandoning entire towns](Arivonimamo "wikilink").

## Events

In 1989, people became fed up with the extreme poverty and undemocratic
nature of the country. Riots broke out and 75 people were killed. In
1990, an activist named Albert Zafy formed an opposition coalition
called Forces Vives comprised of 16 political opposition parties and
socio-professional organizations. Their goal was to organize a series of
mass strikes and protests to force the president out of office and usher
in a new regime.

In May 1991, the Forces Vives orchestrated their first mass [general
strike](List_of_General_Strikes "wikilink") against the government,
temporarily crippling the economy, and in July mass demonstrations shook
the nation. The year 1991 was dotted with civil service strikes and
protests organized by the Forces Vives that involved indignant citizens
from all over the country. The unrest was widespread and apparent,
taking hold among the [working class](Working_Class "wikilink") citizens
of Madagascar, the politicians, and soon the military.

### Massacre

The popular discontent with the regime took a new significance on August
10, 1991, when the Forces Vives organized a massive, peaceful march to
the Presidentâ€™s Palace. Between 100,000 and 400,000 people (in a country
of 11 million) marched demanding the president step down from office to
give way to a multiparty political system. When the activists reached
the palace they were confronted by the presidential guard whose methods
of dispersal proved fruitless until they opened fire with guns and
grenades into the crowd. Between ten and twenty people were killed and
many more were wounded. Shortly after the killings the Forces Vives
orchestrated another massive strike against all banks, businesses, and
public agencies; the Forces Vives maintained the widespread strike
through August. In addition, local demonstrations and protests continued
during the strike. In response to the August 10th killings, the
anti-government protesters gained an ally in the National Council of
Christian Churches, which threw its support behind the protesters when
their attempts to mediate the situation failed.

## Results

In 1991 it was announced by the government that Madagascar would
democratise, with [elections](Representative_Democracy "wikilink") in
1992 which were multi-party and judged to be fair. Since then,
Madagascar has been a stable democracy. However, it is one of the
poorest countries in the world and still sees issues with child labor,
human trafficking and violence against women.

## References

[Global Nonviolent Action
Database](Global_Nonviolent_Action_Database "wikilink") - [Madagascar
citizens force free elections,
1990-1992](https://nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu/content/madagascar-citizens-force-free-elections-1990-1992)

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Africa](Category:Africa "wikilink") [Category:Southern
Africa](Category:Southern_Africa "wikilink")
[Category:1989](Category:1989 "wikilink")
[Category:1991](Category:1991 "wikilink")
[Category:1990](Category:1990 "wikilink")
[Category:1990s](Category:1990s "wikilink")
[Category:1980s](Category:1980s "wikilink") [Category:20th
Century](Category:20th_Century "wikilink") [Category:Revolutions of
1986 - 1992](Category:Revolutions_of_1986_-_1992 "wikilink")
[Category:Madagascar](Category:Madagascar "wikilink") [Category:Social
Movements](Category:Social_Movements "wikilink")