---
title: Make Rojava Green Again
permalink: /Make_Rojava_Green_Again/
---

*Not to be confused with the [book of the same
name](Make_Rojava_Green_Again_(Book) "wikilink")*

**Make Rojava Green Again** is an [environmentalist
program](Environmentalism "wikilink") that has been carried out in
[Rojava](Rojava "wikilink") since
[2016](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Western_Asia "wikilink"). It
has been involved in protecting and restoring damaged ecosystems in
Rojava and working to raise awareness in other countries, notably
[Germany](Germany "wikilink").

## Background

In Rojava, the social origin of ecological problems is particularly
visible. The Damascus regime has established a colonial-type economy in
predominantly Kurdish areas. The Baath regime imposed monocultures of
wheat in Cizir, olives in Afrin and a mix of the two in Kobane to
maximize the potential to exploit the region’s natural resources. To do
this, the forests were systematically razed and the population was
forbidden to plant trees and vegetables. The aim was also to prevent the
Kurds from being able to maintain food autonomy and force them to leave
their region to work in the industries of the metropolis, thus
undermining any possibility of resistance.

## Projects

### Community Gardens

After cleaning several neighbourhood riverbeds will be used as a small
park. For this different types of local trees will be planted and to
also invite the local population benches will be put up. The gardens
will be taken care of collectively and the harvest will be shared within
the commune.[^1]

### Reforestation

Several worker cooperatives have been set up around various wildlife
reserves (with a ban on hunting and fishing) to plant olive and oak
trees, grown using recycled water and fertilizer.[^2]

### Renewable Energy

Most of the grid electricity in Rojava comes from hydroelectric dams,
with about a quarter derived from the natural gas flared during oil
production. Municipal and private diesel generators fill in the gaps.
Several wind turbines have been built to help transition to a more
ecological form of energy production.[^3]

## References

<references />

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Syria](Category:Syria "wikilink")
[Category:Rojava](Category:Rojava "wikilink") [Category:Western
Asia](Category:Western_Asia "wikilink")
[Category:Asia](Category:Asia "wikilink")
[Category:Environmentalism](Category:Environmentalism "wikilink")
[Category:Democratic
Confederalism](Category:Democratic_Confederalism "wikilink")

[^1]: <https://makerojavagreenagain.org/portfolio/community-garden-and-planting-project-in-the-city/>

[^2]: <https://makerojavagreenagain.org/portfolio/reforestation/>

[^3]: <https://makerojavagreenagain.org/portfolio_tag/environment/>