---
title: Mas de las Matas
permalink: /Mas_de_las_Matas/
---

**Mas de las Matas** is a small town in Aragon,
[Spain](Spain.md "wikilink") which was a part of [Revolutionary
Spain](Revolutionary_Spain.md "wikilink") during the [Spanish Civil
War](Spanish_Civil_War.md "wikilink").

## Revolution

Despite having a population of around 3,200 in 1936, 2,000 belong to the
CNT and 300 to the UGT,

Food is rationed. Only bread is distributed without limit. Of the 3,200
residents of the village, 2,000 belong to the CNT and 300 to the UGT.
Five hundred heads of families, a total of 2,000 people, belong to the
collective. The remaining 300 residents are individualists. They must
pay for things with money. Since there are no private stores and shops,
they must buy from the collective where they have a line of credit. Food
must be rationed for them also. The individualists bring the product of
their labour to the collective and receive merchandise of equivalent
value. They can, if they wish, take their goods to the city, but this
gives them no line of credit. They prefer to work with the collective.
Authority is in the hands of the CNT. There is a Committee of
Investigation, but the prison is empty. The community has a flour mill
which produces for its own consumption. A mill worker explains: "There
are too many comrades at the front. We do not have enough hands. Our day
begins at five in the morning and ends after dark. But we like to work
because we know we are in the fight against fascism."

Alcohol production for Aragon is located in Saragossa, which is cut off
from free Spain. New distilleries have been built in the liberated zone.
A small one is located in this village. It produces 200 litres of
alcohol per day. The alcohol is shipped to Caspe, provincial capital of
free Aragon. The former owner continues to work in the distillery and so
does the technical director. A small dress shop employs ten girls who
work eight hours a day. Like the mill workers, they are not paid a wage.
Formerly they received two pesetas a day. Now, in a socialised economy,
they are doing much better. They are clean and well dressed, and they
all know how to read and write. There are no unemployed workers
anywhere. The former owner of the shop is as concerned for the work
today as in the past. When we visited the shop the workers had already
left. However, he was still working. We question him:

"I don't have the burdens and the worries now," he declares. "In the
past the shop was idle several months a year. Now we work steady through
the year. I don't have to worry about getting orders. I have enough to
live. The collective takes care of everything. I worked before. I'm
still working."

This former owner took the revolution with equanimity, putting a good
face on what could not be avoided. Collectivisation took place in the
town in September, 1936. It was done under the law of confiscation of
the property of fascists. The collectivity decided to collectivise all
private property on the basis of the law. The former owners of shops and
plants did not oppose the new order. The law permitted them to continue
to own their property, but they joined the collective voluntarily and
turned over their property.

The doctor does not belong to the collective. He is known to have
rightist ideas. But his convictions are respected; he continues to
practice his profession as previously.

The collective has not yet created new institutions. Their tolerance of
the individualists impresses favourably. The individualists are a
minority. The collectivists are the majority not only in the town, but
in the entire province. They have the capacity to force the
individualists to accept the new economic system. But they have not done
so. Membership in the collective is voluntary. Those who wish to remain
outside the collective are not condemned. However, the individualists do
not have the privilege of hiring people to work for them. They can have
as much land as they can cultivate together with the members of their
families. They can work for themselves and they have nothing to fear
from the collective.

Compared with the collectives, the situation of the individualists is
poor. Collective work, collective economy offers advantages to the
members of the collective. The individualist must endure difficulties in
silence. Many understand this and they join the collective. Only
dyed-in-the-wool conservatives are unable to change their attitudes.

The new idea has great suggestive force. The main idea behind
collectivisation arises out of the philosophy of anarchism, as does
libertarian communism.

## References

<https://libcom.org/history/peasants-aragon>