---
title: Mexico
permalink: /Mexico/
---

**Mexico**, (officially the **United Mexican States**) is a
[liberal](Liberalism "wikilink") [colonial](Colonialism "wikilink")
[capitalist](Capitalism "wikilink") [state](List_of_States "wikilink")
in the southern portion of North America. It is bordered to the north by
the [United States](United_States_of_America "wikilink"); to the south
and west by the Pacific Ocean; to the southeast by
[Guatemala](Guatemala "wikilink"), [Belize](Belize "wikilink"), and the
Caribbean Sea; and to the east by the Gulf of Mexico. It is the 13th
largest state on Earth by land claimed, and the 10th largest by
population claimed. It also claims the fourth largest amount of
biodiversity, being a [megadiverse
country](Megadiverse_Country "wikilink").

## History

### Porfiriato

The dictator Porfirio Diaz ruled Mexico from 1876 to 1910. It strongly
supported [landlords](Landlord "wikilink") and oversaw a slow industrial
revolution in a few cities, but much of the country worked on
[farms](Agriculture "wikilink"), producing cash crops (like sugar,
coffee, cotton and rubber) for export. The remaining [communal land
holdings](Commons "wikilink") (mainly held by indigenous Mexicans) were
forcefully enclosed to make sure [private
property](Private_Property "wikilink") began to dominate the country,
indigenous peasants who refused to leave or were willing to fight were
killed by landlord-funded paramilitaries known as the White Guards.
[Peasants](Peasants "wikilink") were paid in crops and forced to
purchase items from company shops which had inflated prices, forcing
them into debt which was passed onto children, and anyone who tried to
escape were hunted down by the White Guards. Conditions on these farms
were extremely harsh, killing between 173,000 and 2,015,000 people in a
country with a population of less than 16,000,000.[^1][^2][^3]

### Revolution

The [Mexican Revolution](Mexican_Revolution "wikilink") (1910 - 1920)
broke out after nearly 50 years of this tyranny, with peasant militias
seizing land and in some towns taking over factories. Anarchist communes
were established in [Morelos](Morelos_Commune "wikilink") and
[Baja](Baja_Commune "wikilink") to present a working alternative of
indigenous [libertarian socialism](Libertarian_Socialism "wikilink").
But these were defeated by the military, led by a new [socially
democratic](Social_Democracy "wikilink") government.

## Libertarian Socialist Communities

- [Zapatista
  Municipalities](Rebel_Zapatista_Autonomous_Municipalities "wikilink")
- [Zaachila](Zaachila "wikilink")
- [Cherán](Cherán "wikilink")

## References

<references />

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Mexico](Category:Mexico "wikilink") [Category:North
America](Category:North_America "wikilink") [Category:Central
America](Category:Central_America "wikilink")
[Category:States](Category:States "wikilink") [Category:Liberal
States](Category:Liberal_States "wikilink") [Category:Colonial
States](Category:Colonial_States "wikilink")

[^1]: <https://www.hawaii.edu/powerkills/SOD.CHAP11.HTM>

[^2]: <http://www.populstat.info/Americas/mexicoc.htm>

[^3]: <https://libcom.org/history/1867-2000-a-people-s-history-of-mexico>