---
title: Mikhail Bakunin
permalink: /Mikhail_Bakunin/
---

**Mikhail Alexandrovich Bakunin** (30th of May 1814 - 1st of July 1876)
was one of the most influential figures in the history and development
of [anarchism](anarchism "wikilink"), so much so that he is sometimes
referred to as the 'father of anarchism'. He is credited with linking
the anarchist movement to [feminism](feminism "wikilink"),
[atheism](atheism "wikilink"), [revolution](revolution "wikilink"),
developing the concept of
[anarcho-collectivism](Anarcho-Collectivism "wikilink") and being one of
the first critics of the very concept of
[markets](Market_Economy "wikilink"). However, he was known to be openly
racist and anti-semitic, with critics accusing him of being a violent
terrorist.

## Biography

### Family

According to legend, the Bakunin dynasty was founded in 1492 by one of
the three brothers of the noble Báthory family who left Hungary to serve
under Vasili III of Russia. The first documented ancestor was a Moscow
dyak (clerk) Nikifor Evdokimov nicknamed Bakunya (from the Russian
*bakunya*, *bakulya* meaning "chatterbox, phrase monger") who lived
during the 17th century. Mikhail was the son of Alexander Mikhailovich
Bakunin, a diplomat who served in Italy and France and retired to a
feudal estate consisting of 500 serfs (where Mikhail was born) and his
grandmother, knyazna Lubov Petrovna Myshetskaya, belonged to the
impoverished Upper Oka Principalities branch of the Rurik dynasty
founded by Mikhail Yurievich Tarussky, grandson of Michael of Chernigov.

In 1810, Alexander Bakunin married Varvara Alexandrovna Muravyova
(1792 - 1864) who was 24 years younger than him. She came from the
ancient noble Muravyov family that was founded during the 15th century
by the Ryazan boyar Ivan Vasilievich Alapovsky nicknamed Muravey
(translates simply as "ant") who was granted lands in Veliky Novgorod.
Among her second cousins were Nikita Muravyov and Sergey
Muravyov-Apostol, some of the key figures of the Decembrist revolt.
Alexander's commitment to liberal ideas also led to his involvement with
one in the Decembrist clubs. After Nicolas I became an Emperor, he gave
up politics and devoted himself to the estate and his children—five
girls and five boys, the oldest of whom was Mikhail.

### Youth

At the age of 14, Bakunin left for Saint Petersburg and trained as an
artillery officer, and went to serve in Minsk in 1833. He did not enjoy
army and having a lot of free time on his hands spent it on
self-education. He eventually left the army in 1835, hoping to study
philosophy in Moscow. He met and befriended several former university
students in Moscow, notably Nikolay Stankevich, Konstantin Aksakov,
Piotr Chaadaev, Alexander Herzen and Nikolay Ogarev.

They studied the philosophies of Kant, Fichte, Schelling, Goethe,
Hoffman and Hegel. Bakunin translated many of these works into Russian
and began to advocate for a unified Slavic nation. He left for Berlin in
1840, and desired to become a university philosophy professor, and
encountered many Young Hegelians and Berlin's socialist movement. He
moved to Dresden, and befriended Arnold Ruge and became an avowed
socialist, abandoning his interest in being a professor and became
dedicated to promoting revolution. This led to troubles with the Russian
government, who ordered his return to Russia, and when he refused,
confiscated his property, leading him to move to Switzerland in 1842.

He stayed in Zürich and befriended Wilhelm Weitling and began calling
himself a communist, authoring articles for communist newspapers. He
moved to Geneva shortly before Weitling's arrest, leading to him being
investigated by the Swiss police. He was once again ordered to return to
Russia, but left for Belgium instead, meeting many German and Polish
radicals in exile, notably Joachim Lelewel, Karl Marx and Friedrich
Engels in Brussels. He came into conflict with his nationalist friends
as he began to support liberty for all people and the liberation of the
peasantry.

In 1844, Bakunin went to Paris and established contact with Karl Marx
and Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, who greatly impressed him and with whom he
formed a personal bond. He was stripped of his nobility and his land in
Russia was confiscated and was condemned to exile in Siberia. But he
refused to go there and travelled through Europe, advocating a joint
revolution of Polish and Russian people against the Russian Empire.

### Revolution, Arrest and Exile

He participated in the 1848 Revolution in Europe as was very happy,
obtaining funding from the Provisional Government for the liberation of
Slavs in the Prussia, Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman Empires. He traveled
through Germany and tried to join the insurrection in Baden, leading to
conflict with Karl Marx. He was refused entry to Poland, and then
travelled to Leipzig, Breslau and Prague where he participated in the
First Pan Slav Congress, leading to him participating in the May
Conspiracy and the May Uprising in Dresden in 1849, helping to organize
the defense of the barricades against Prussian troops with Richard
Wagner and Wilhelm Heine. Bakunin was captured in Chemnitz and held for
thirteen months before being condemned to death by the government of
Saxony.

He was saved an extradited to Russia, and then Austria, where he was
sentenced to death, but then extradited to Russia, taken to the
underground dungeons of the Peter and Paul Fortress. He spent another
four years in the castle of Shlisselburg. It was here that he suffered
from scurvy and all his teeth fell out as a result of the diet. He later
recounted that he found some relief in mentally re-enacting the legend
of Prometheus. His continuing imprisonment in these awful conditions led
him to consider suicide by the consumption of smuggled poison.

Pleas from his noble family led to his release from prison, allowing him
to go into exile into the Tomsk, Siberia. He married Antonina
Kwiatkowska, the daughter of a Polish merchant. He had been teaching her
French. He got a job with the Amur Development Agency from his second
cousin, the liberal governor in Eastern Siberia. Mikhail proposed the
construction of a United States of Siberia, modeled of the [United
States of America](United_States_of_America "wikilink"). Mikahil quit
his job and recieved a pension from the state, and his second cousin was
forced to resigned over his views and fear of a Siberian revolution. He
was replaced by the new and more liberal governor Korsakov, who gave him
free passage on all ships in the Amur river so long as he returned to
the city of Irkutsk in winter.

### Escape from Exile

On the 5th of June, 1861, Mikhail began his escape from Russia, by
claiming he was on a business trip to Nikolaevsk, taking the Russian
warship *Strelok* to the port city of Olga, where he boarded an American
ship to Japan, befriending a group of Europeans in Japan by chance and
took a ship to San Francisco. He then took a ship to Panama, and then to
New York, where he went to Boston, finding a group of exiled European
revolutionaries. He then left to Europe and became immersed in the
revolutionary movement, moving to England. He attempted to join the
Polish Insurrection in 1863, but became stuck in Copenhagen, with the
failure of the insurrection, he met his wife in Stockholm and moved
through to London, Brussels, Paris and Switzerland to get to Italy in
order to create a new revolutionary force in the new country known as
the Alliance of Revolutionary Socialists.

By 1866, his secret society grew to have members in most of Europe's
countries, and began to oppose the very existence of the
[state](State_(Polity) "wikilink"). He met Giuseppe Fanelli and later
sponsored him to travel to Barcelona to share his libertarian visions
and recruit revolutionists to the International Workingmen's
Association. He began to advocated for the libertarian socialism of
Proudhon, and began to attend IWA conferences yearly.

During the 1867–1868 period, Bakunin responded to Émile Acollas's call
and became involved in the League of Peace and Freedom (LPF), for which
he wrote a lengthy essay *Federalism, Socialism, and
Anti-Theologism*<sup>\[33\]</sup> Here he advocated a federalist
socialism, drawing on the work of Proudhon. He supported freedom of
association and the right of secession for each unit of the federation,
but emphasized that this freedom must be joined with socialism for
"\[l\]iberty without socialism is privilege, injustice; socialism
without liberty is slavery and brutality".

Bakunin played a prominent role in the Geneva Conference (September
1867), and joined the Central Committee. The founding conference was
attended by 6,000 people. As Bakunin rose to speak:

At the Bern Congress of the League (1868), Bakunin and other socialists
(Élisée Reclus, Aristide Rey, Jaclard, Giuseppe Fanelli, N. Joukovsky,
V. Mratchkovsky and others) found themselves in a minority. They seceded
from the League establishing their own International Alliance of
Socialist Democracy which adopted a revolutionary socialist program.

### First International and the rise of the anarchist movement

Bakunin speaking to members of the IWA at the Basel Congress in 1869

Bakunin in 1872

Bakunin's grave at the Bremgarten cemetery in Bern

In 1868, Bakunin joined the Geneva section of the First International,
in which he remained very active until he was expelled from the
International by Karl Marx and his followers at the Hague Congress in
1872. Bakunin was instrumental in establishing branches of the
International in Italy and Spain.

In 1869, the Social Democratic Alliance was refused entry to the First
International on the grounds that it was an international organisation
in itself, and only national organisations were permitted membership in
the International. The Alliance dissolved and the various groups which
it comprised joined the International separately.

Between 1869 and 1870, Bakunin became involved with the Russian
revolutionary Sergey Nechayev in a number of clandestine projects.
However, Bakunin publicly broke with Nechaev over what he described as
the latter's "Jesuit" methods, by which all means were justified to
achieve revolutionary ends, <sup>\[35\]</sup> but privately attempted to
maintain contact. <sup>\[36\]</sup>

In 1870, Bakunin led a failed uprising in Lyon on the principles later
exemplified by the Paris Commune, calling for a general uprising in
response to the collapse of the French government during the
Franco-Prussian War, seeking to transform an imperialist conflict into
social revolution. In his *Letters to A Frenchman on the Present
Crisis*, he argued for a revolutionary alliance between the working
class and the peasantry, advocated a system of militias with elected
officers as part of a system of self-governing communes and workplaces,
and argued the time was ripe for revolutionary action:

These ideas corresponded strikingly closely with the program of the
Paris Commune of 1871, much of which was developed by followers of
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon; the Marxist and Blanquist factions had voted for
confrontation with the army while the Proudhonions had supported a
truce. Bakunin was a strong supporter of the Commune, which was brutally
suppressed by the French government. He saw the Commune as above all a
"rebellion against the State," and commended the Communards for
rejecting not only the State but also revolutionary
dictatorship.<sup>\[38\]</sup> In a series of powerful pamphlets, he
defended the Commune and the First International against the Italian
nationalist Giuseppe Mazzini, thereby winning over many Italian
republicans to the International and the cause of revolutionary
socialism.

Bakunin's disagreements with Marx, which led to the attempt by the Marx
party to expel him at the Hague Congress (see below), illustrated the
growing divergence between the "anti-authoritarian" sections of the
International, which advocated the direct revolutionary action and
organization of the workers and peasants in order to abolish the state
and capitalism, and the sections allied with Marx, which advocated the
conquest of political power by the working class. Bakunin was "Marx’s
flamboyant chief opponent" and "presciently warned against the emergence
of a communist authoritarianism that would take power over working
people."<sup>\[39\]</sup>

### Personal life

In 1874, Bakunin retired with his young wife Antonia Kwiatkowska and
three children to Minusio (near Locarno in Switzerland), in a villa
called *La Baronata* that the leader of the Italian anarchists Carlo
Cafiero had bought for him by selling his own estates in his native town
Barletta (Apulia). His daughter Maria Bakunin (1873-1960) became a
chemist and biologist. His daughter Sofia was the mother of Italian
mathematician Renato Caccioppoli.

Bakunin died in Bern on 1 July 1876. His grave can be found in
*Bremgarten Cemetery* of Bern, box 9201, grave 68. His original epitaph
reads: "Remember those who sacrificed everything for the freedom of
their country". In 2015 the commemorative plate was replaced in form of
a bronze portrait of Bakunin by Swiss artist Daniel Garbade containing
Bakunin's quote: "By striving to do the impossible, man has always
achieved what is possible". It was sponsored by the Dadaists of Cabaret
Voltaire Zurich, who adopted Bakunin post mortem.

### Freemasonry

Bakunin joined the Scottish Lodge of the Grand Orient de France in
1845.<sup>\[42\]:128</sup> However his involvement with freemasonry
lapsed until he was in Florence in the summer of 1864. Garibaldi had
attended first real Italian Masonic Constituent Assembly in Florence in
May of that year, and been elected Grand Master of the Grand Orient of
Italy.<sup>\[43\]</sup>Here the local head of the Mazzinist party was
also grand master of the local lodge. Although he was soon to dismiss
freemasonry, it was in this period that he abandoned his previous belief
in a god and embraced atheism. He formulated the phrase "God exists,
therefore man is a slave. Man is free, therefore there is no God. Escape
this dilemma who can!" which appeared in his unpublished *Catechism of a
freemason*<sup>\[44\]</sup> Indeed it was during this period that he
established the International Revolutionary Association, he did so with
Italian revolutionaries who had broken with Mazzini because they
rejected his Deism as well as his purely ‘political’ conception of the
revolution, which they saw as being bourgeois with no element of a
social revolution.<sup>\[45\]</sup>

## Quotes

"FREEDOM, the realization of freedom: who can deny that this is what
today heads the agenda of history? We must not only act politically, but
in our politics act religiously, religiously in the sense of freedom, of
which the one true expression is justice and love."[^1]

"The passion for destruction is a creative passion, too!" (often
paraphrased as "The urge to destroy is a creative urge".[^2]

"Unity is the great goal toward which humanity moves irresistibly. But
it becomes fatal, destructive of the intelligence, the dignity, the
well-being of individuals and peoples whenever it is formed without
regard to liberty, either by violent means or under the authority of any
theological, metaphysical, political, or even economic idea. That
patriotism which tends toward unity without regard to liberty is an evil
patriotism, always disastrous to the popular and real interests of the
country it claims to exalt and serve. Often, without wishing to be so,
it is a friend of reaction – an enemy of the revolution, i.e., the
emancipation of nations and men."[^3]

"Liberty is so great a magician, endowed with so marvelous a power of
productivity, that under the inspiration of this spirit alone, North
America was able within less than a century to equal, and even surpass,
the civilization of Europe."[^4]

"We are convinced that liberty without socialism is privilege and
injustice; and that socialism without liberty is slavery and
brutality."[^5]

"Political Freedom without economic equality is a pretense, a fraud, a
lie; and the workers want no lying."[^6]

"I am a fanatic lover of liberty, considering it as the unique condition
under which intelligence, dignity and human happiness can develop and
grow; not the purely formal liberty conceded, measured out and regulated
by the State, an eternal lie which in reality represents nothing more
than the privilege of some founded on the slavery of the rest; not the
individualistic, egoistic, shabby, and fictitious liberty extolled by
the School of [J.-J. Rousseau](Jean-Jacques_Rosseau "wikilink") and
other schools of bourgeois liberalism, which considers the would-be
rights of all men, represented by the State which limits the rights of
each — an idea that leads inevitably to the reduction of the rights of
each to zero. No, I mean the only kind of liberty that is worthy of the
name, liberty that consists in the full development of all the material,
intellectual and moral powers that are latent in each person; liberty
that recognizes no restrictions other than those determined by the laws
of our own individual nature, which cannot properly be regarded as
restrictions since these laws are not imposed by any outside legislator
beside or above us, but are immanent and inherent, forming the very
basis of our material, intellectual and moral being — they do not limit
us but are the real and immediate conditions of our freedom."[^7]

"To revolt is a natural tendency of life. Even a worm turns against the
foot that crushes it. In general, the vitality and relative dignity of
an animal can be measured by the intensity of its instinct to
revolt."[^8]

"Revolution requires extensive and widespread destruction, a fecund and
renovating destruction, since in this way and only this way are new
worlds born."[^9]

"Freedom is the absolute right of every human being to seek no other
sanction for his actions but his own conscience, to determine these
actions solely by his own will, and consequently to owe his first
responsibility to himself alone."[^10]

"If there is a State, there must be domination of one class by another
and, as a result, slavery; the State without slavery is unthinkable –
and this is why we are the enemies of the State."[^11]

"When the people are being beaten with a stick, they are not much
happier if it is called 'the People's Stick.'"[^12]

"The modern State is by its very nature a military State; and every
military State must of necessity become a conquering, invasive State; to
survive it must conquer or be conquered, for the simple reason that
accumulated military power will suffocate if it does not find an outlet.
Therefore the modern State must strive to be a huge and powerful State:
this is the indispensable precondition for its survival."[^13]

"We wish, in a word, equality — equality in fact as a corollary, or
rather, as primordial condition of liberty. From each according to their
faculties, to each according to their needs; that is what we wish
sincerely and energetically."[^14]

"No theory, no ready-made system, no book that has ever been written
will save the world. I cleave to no system. I am a true seeker."[^15]

"I hate Communism because it is the negation of liberty and because
humanity is for me unthinkable without liberty. I am not a Communist,
because Communism concentrates and swallows up in itself for the benefit
of the State all the forces of society, because it inevitably leads to
the concentration of property in the hands of the State, whereas I want
the abolition of the State, the final eradication of the principle of
authority and the patronage proper to the State, which under the pretext
of moralizing and civilizing men has hitherto only enslaved, persecuted,
exploited and corrupted them. I want to see society and collective or
social property organized from below upwards, by way of free
association, not from above downwards, by means of any kind of authority
whatsoever."[^16]

"All exercise of authority perverts, and submission to authority
humiliates."[^17]

"Every state, like every theology, assumes man to be fundamentally bad
and wicked."[^18]

"Even the most wretched individual of our present society could not
exist and develop without the cumulative social efforts of countless
generations. Thus the individual, his freedom and reason, are the
products of society, and not vice versa: society is not the product of
individuals comprising it; and the higher, the more fully the individual
is developed, the greater his freedom — and the more he is the product
of society, the more does he receive from society and the greater his
debt to it."[^19]

"By striving to do the impossible, man has always achieved what is
possible. Those who have cautiously done no more than they believed
possible have never taken a single step forward."[^20]

"The peoples' revolution will arrange its revolutionary organisation
from the bottom up and from the periphery to the centre, in keeping with
the principle of liberty."[^21]

"I am truly free only when all human beings, men and women, are equally
free. The freedom of other men, far from negating or limiting my
freedom, is, on the contrary, its necessary premise and
confirmation."[^22]

"The materialistic, realistic, and collectivist conception of freedom,
as opposed to the idealistic, is this: Man becomes conscious of himself
and his humanity only in society and only by the collective action of
the whole society. He frees himself from the yoke of external nature
only by collective and social labor, which alone can transform the earth
into an abode favorable to the development of humanity. Without such
material emancipation the intellectual and moral emancipation of the
individual is impossible. He can emancipate himself from the yoke of his
own nature, i.e. subordinate his instincts and the movements of his body
to the conscious direction of his mind, the development of which is
fostered only by education and training. But education and training are
preeminently and exclusively social hence the isolated individual cannot
possibly become conscious of his freedom. To be free means to be
acknowledged and treated as such by all his fellowmen. The liberty of
every individual is only the reflection of his own humanity, or his
human right through the conscience of all free men, his brothers and his
equals. I can feel free only in the presence of and in relationship with
other men. In the presence of an inferior species of animal I am neither
free nor a man, because this animal is incapable of conceiving and
consequently recognizing my humanity. I am not myself free or human
until or unless I recognize the freedom and humanity of all my
fellowmen. Only in respecting their human character do I respect my
own."[^23]

-

## References

<references />

[Category:Anarchists](Category:Anarchists "wikilink")
[Category:Anarcho-Collectivists](Category:Anarcho-Collectivists "wikilink")
[Category:Atheism](Category:Atheism "wikilink")
[Category:Feminists](Category:Feminists "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialism](Category:Libertarian_Socialism "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialists](Category:Libertarian_Socialists "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Russia](Category:Russia "wikilink") [Category:Eastern
Europe](Category:Eastern_Europe "wikilink")
[Category:Europe](Category:Europe "wikilink")
[Category:Asia](Category:Asia "wikilink") [Category:Northern
Asia](Category:Northern_Asia "wikilink")

[^1]: Mikhail Bakunin (1842) The Reaction in Germany
    [www.marxists.org/reference/archive/bakunin/works/1842/reaction-germany.htm](https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/bakunin/works/1842/reaction-germany.htm) -
    He wrote under the fake name Jules Elysard.

[^2]:

[^3]: Mikhail Bakunin (1867) Federalism, Socialism and Anti-Theologism -
    <https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/bakunin/works/various/reasons-of-state.htm>

[^4]:

[^5]:

[^6]: Mikhail Bakunin (1870) The Red Association -
    <https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/bakunin/works/writings/ch05.htm>

[^7]: Mikhail Bakunin (1871) The Paris Commune and the idea of the
    state - <http://libcom.org/library/paris-commune-mikhail-bakunin>

[^8]: Mikhail Bakunin (1872) On the International Workingmen's
    Association and Karl Marx -
    <https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/bakunin/works/1872/karl-marx.htm>

[^9]: Mikhail Bakunin (1873) [Statism and
    Anarchy](Statism_and_Anarchy "wikilink") -
    <https://libcom.org/library/statism-anarchy-mikhail-bakunin>

[^10]: [Daniel Guérin](Daniel_Guérin "wikilink") (1970) [Anarchism: From
    Theory to Practice](Anarchism:_From_Theory_to_Practice "wikilink")

[^11]:

[^12]:

[^13]:

[^14]: J. Morris Davidson (1890) The Old Order and the New

[^15]: E.H. Carr (1937) Michael Bakunin, page 175

[^16]: E.H. Carr (1937) Michael Bakunin, page 356

[^17]: E.H. Carr (1937) Michael Bakunin, page 453

[^18]:

[^19]: G. P. Maximoff (1953) The Philosophy of Bakunin, page 158

[^20]: Paolo Novaresio (1996) The Explorers

[^21]: Mikhail Bakunin (1868) *Program and Object of the Secret
    Revolutionary Organisation of the International Brotherhood*

[^22]: Mikhail Bakunin (1871) Man, Society, and Freedom

[^23]: