---
title: Mining
permalink: /Mining/
---

**Mining**refers to a range of methods used to extract natural resources
from underground. Mining has a complex relationship to [libertarian
socialism](Libertarian_Socialism.md "wikilink"). Mineworkers' have
traditionally been some of the most exploited members of the working
class and have seen some of the most violent struggles against the
[state](State_(Polity).md "wikilink") and
[capitalism](capitalism.md "wikilink"). Whilst environmentalists have
frequently fought against the construction and operation of mines, given
the extensive pollution generated by mining.

## Mining in Libertarian Socialism

[Augustin Souchy](Augustin_Souchy.md "wikilink") wrote a description of
coal mines in [Oliete](Oliete.md "wikilink") during the [Spanish
Revolution](Spanish_Revolution_(1936).md "wikilink"):

> Coal was found on the outskirts of the town.They started to mine it
> immediately. They ship olive oil to Barcelona. With the proceeds of
> the sale they buy machinery, electrical supplies, motors and a water
> pump. Eighteen young workers work in the mine. They began to draw out
> coal January 1st. They had no engineer or technician to assist them.
> One of the two emigrants had worked in the coal mines of northern
> France during his long years of exile. He put his experience to the
> service of the cause cheerfully. Rails and electricity were installed
> in the mine and production started within a few weeks. They produce a
> freight car load per day. Production could be tripled if there were
> enough hands and enough machinery.[^1]

## References

<references />

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink")
[Category:Concepts](Category:Concepts.md "wikilink")
[Category:Mining](Category:Mining.md "wikilink")

[^1]: <https://libcom.org/history/peasants-aragon>