---
title: Minoan Crete Civilization
permalink: /Minoan_Crete_Civilization/
---

The **Minoan Crete Civilization** ([3000BCE -
1100BCE](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism "wikilink")) was an
[egalitarian
civilization](List_of_Libertarian_Socialist_Societies "wikilink") that
flourished on Crete and surrounding Aegean islands in the Mediterranean
Sea. It had around 90 different cities and a population reaching into
the millions until it was destroyed by a massive volcanic eruption.[^1]

## Decision-Making

Crete had a written language, but the decoded documents in that language
do not mention laws, rulers, or other elements of statecraft. In almost
all states, one of the primary functions of written language was to
document laws and to chronicle the lives and careers of elites. By
contrast, the writings from Crete seem to focus mostly on trade and a
little on religion.[^2] The abundance of communal buildings, similar
sized houses and absence of evidence for centralized power suggest a
possible use of [assemblies](Democratic_Assembly "wikilink") for
decision-making.

## Foreign Policy

Although some Minoan cities had defensive walls built around them, there
is no evidence that Minoan Civilization engaged in war with other
societies. There is limited evidence of fighting occurring between
citizens, but this was likely for sports and festivals.[^3]

## Economy

The Minoan economy was grounded heavily in trade, although there may
have been some degree of [common ownership and use](Commons "wikilink"),
suggesting [mutualist](Mutualism "wikilink") practices.[^4]

## Culture

Deities depicted in Minoan art are almost exclusively female, [gender
non-conforming](Gender_Non-Conformity "wikilink") or
[transgender](transgender "wikilink") figures. Suggest a society that
was aware of the existence of [queer people](Queer_People "wikilink")
and practiced [gender equality](Gender_Equality "wikilink").[^5]

## References

<references />

[Category:Societies](Category:Societies "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Societies](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Societies "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialism](Category:Libertarian_Socialism "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink") [Category:Gender
Equality](Category:Gender_Equality "wikilink")
[Category:Feminism](Category:Feminism "wikilink") [Category:Queer
Issues](Category:Queer_Issues "wikilink")
[Category:Anarchism](Category:Anarchism "wikilink")
[Category:Greece](Category:Greece "wikilink") [Category:Southern
Europe](Category:Southern_Europe "wikilink")
[Category:Europe](Category:Europe "wikilink") [Category:Before Common
Era](Category:Before_Common_Era "wikilink")

[^1]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") -
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minoan_civilization>

[^2]: [Peter Gelderloos](Peter_Gelderloos "wikilink") (2017) [Worshiping
    Power: An Anarchist View of Early State
    Formation](Worshiping_Power:_An_Anarchist_View_of_Early_State_Formation "wikilink"),
    pages 149 - 150

[^3]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") -
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minoan_civilization#Warfare_and_the_%22Minoan_peace%22>

[^4]:

[^5]: