---
title: Morelos Commune
permalink: /Morelos_Commune/
---

The **Morelos Commune** was a[libertarian socialist
societythat](List_of_Libertarian_Socialist_Societies "wikilink") emerged
during the [Mexican Revolution](Mexican_Revolution "wikilink"). It was
defended by the [Liberation Army of the
South](Liberation_Army_of_the_South "wikilink").

## Decision-Making

Popular self-government was created in the Morelos Commune via a system
of [village assemblies](Democratic_Assembly "wikilink") which met once a
month. They elected delegates that served in a municipal assemblies, who
elected delegates for a [district federation](Confederation "wikilink").
These assemblies have been described as very similar to the
[Soviets](Soviet_(Russia) "wikilink") in the [October
Revolution](October_Revolution_(Russia) "wikilink"), the congresses of
the [Free Territory of Ukraine](Free_Territory_of_Ukraine "wikilink")
and the [Paris Commune](Paris_Commune "wikilink").

## Economics

Peasants expropriated the large haciendas and sugar mills, being [run by
the workers and peasants](Workers'_Self-Management "wikilink"). Sugar
production increased as did food consumption by peasants. Secular and
universal education was also established for children.

## Collapse

Upon the defeat of the Army of the North, the 'revolutionary government'
of Carranza invaded the actually revolutionary state of Morelos,
occupying major cities and towns. Killing hundreds of persons, including
combatants and civilians and including women, children and the elderly,
but the Morelos Commune still existed in the countryside. But the
outbreak of the Spanish Flu destroyed much of the population, leading to
survivors fleeing to the mountains and the collapse of the Morelos
Commune.

## References

<http://www.globallearning-cuba.com/blog-umlthe-view-from-the-southuml/the-morelos-commune>

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialism](Category:Libertarian_Socialism "wikilink") [Category:Mexican
Revolution](Category:Mexican_Revolution "wikilink")
[Category:Mexico](Category:Mexico "wikilink")
[Category:1913](Category:1913 "wikilink")
[Category:1918](Category:1918 "wikilink")
[Category:1910s](Category:1910s "wikilink") [Category:20th
Century](Category:20th_Century "wikilink") [Category:Libertarian
Socialist
Societies](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Societies "wikilink")
[Category:Past Libertarian Socialist
Societies](Category:Past_Libertarian_Socialist_Societies "wikilink")
[Category:Zapatismo](Category:Zapatismo "wikilink")