---
title: Moshav
permalink: /Moshav/
---

**Moshavim**are an [intentional
community](Intentional_Community "wikilink") and
[cooperative](cooperative "wikilink") in [Israel](Israel "wikilink"),
they are different to [Kibbutzim](Kibbutzim "wikilink") as they do not
farm in [common](Commons "wikilink"), but on individually owned land of
fixed and equal size. The first Moshav, Moshav Nahalal was founded in
[September
1921](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Western_Asia "wikilink") and
there are 451 Moshav in Israel.

## Decision-Making

Moshavim are governed by an elected council.

## Economy

Workers produced crops and goods on their properties through individual
and/or pooled labour and resources and used profit and foodstuffs to
provide for themselves. Community projects and facilities were financed
by a special tax (Hebrew: מס ועד‎, *mas va'ad*, lit. *committee tax*).
This tax was equal for all households of the community, thus creating a
system where good farmers were better off than bad ones, unlike in the
communal kibbutzim where (at least theoretically) all members enjoyed
the same living standard.

## Culture

Because the moshav organisation retained the family as the centre of
social life, it was much more attractive to traditional Mizrahi
immigrants in the 1950s and early 1960s; they eschewed bold experiments,
like communal child-rearing or equality of the sexes, practiced by the
more radical communal kibbutz. These so-called "immigrants' moshav"
(Hebrew: מושב עולים‎, *moshav olim*) were one of the most-used and
successful forms of absorption and integration of Oriental immigrants;
it allowed them a much steadier ascent into the middle class than did
life in some development towns. For this reason, the moshav became
largely a Mizrahi institution, whereas the kibbutz movement remained
basically an Ashkenazi institution.[^1]

## References

<references />

[Category:Israel](Category:Israel "wikilink")
[Category:Palestine](Category:Palestine "wikilink")
[Category:Israel-Palestine](Category:Israel-Palestine "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Societies](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Societies "wikilink")
[Category:Current Libertarian Socialist
Societies](Category:Current_Libertarian_Socialist_Societies "wikilink")
[Category:Intentional
Communities](Category:Intentional_Communities "wikilink")
[Category:Cooperatives](Category:Cooperatives "wikilink")

[^1]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") -
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moshav>