---
title: N2 Gateway Occupations (2008)
permalink: /N2_Gateway_Occupations_(2008)/
---

The **N2 Gateway Occupations** was a mass
[squatting](squatting.md "wikilink") campaign where people illegally
squatted in public housing, and is the largest occupation in South
African history and took place from [December
2007](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Southern_Africa.md "wikilink")
to February [2008](Revolutions_of_2008_-_2014.md "wikilink").

## Background

The N2 Gateway project was the largest single public housing project
ever carried out, housing

## Occupation

The BNG houses were originally promised to backyard dwellers in the
area. After the January 2005 fire in Joe Slovo Informal Settlement, 1000
Joe Slovo families were moved to Transit Camps in Delft and promised
priority in the allocation of N2 Gateway housing in
Delft.<sup>\[3\]</sup>

The houses were occupied by backyard dwellers and other mostly poor
residents in and around Delft on the 19th of December 2007. After the
occupation, it emerged that a local DA councillor, Frank Martin, had
encouraged local families to occupy the houses. Though the charges
against Martin were later dropped,<sup>\[4\]</sup> what ensued was a
high-profile political fight between the ANC and DA, each accusing the
other of racism, playing party politics, and using the poor for their
own gain.<sup>\[5\]\[6\]</sup> Police and a private security company
began evicting residents on the 24th of December but were ordered to
stop after the Cape High Court said that the evictions were illegal
because the sheriff was using an eviction order granted to the City of
Cape Town in October 2006 against other people.<sup>\[7\]</sup>
<sup>\[8\]</sup>

## Legal

Litigation resumed in January 2008 and on the 5th of February, the Cape
High Court granted an eviction order. The judge ignored the section of
the 1999 PIE Act which requires reasonable alternative accommodation to
be provided to people who are evicted with nowhere else to go on the
basis that they could find accommodation where they came from. As part
of the order, the judge also faulted Frank Martin for instigating the
occupation and who pledge no contest to allegations during the trial.
Residents attempted to appeal the eviction order on the 15th of February
and their appeal was rejected without a hearing.<sup>\[9\]</sup>

## Eviction

The eviction order went into effect at 5am, 19 February 2008, the next
day after Judge Van Zyl refused to hear the residents' appeal. During
the evictions, police used stun grenades and rubber bullets against
crowds protesting their eviction orders. At least 20 residents were
injured.

After the evictions, about 1000 families slept in the open. They
eventually chose to either occupy Symphony Way or set up camp in a
nearby open space. The latter group eventually were moved to a newly
built Temporary Relocation Area (TRA) nicknamed Blikkiesdorp which was
built by the City of Cape Town. The families living on Symphony Way have
refused to be moved to any TRA and continue to occupy the road.

On February 18, 2009, a City of Cape Town disciplinary committee found
Martin guilty of encouraging people to invade homes at
Delft.<sup>\[13\]</sup> As punishment, Martin was suspended for one
month, while former supporters of the councillor expressed outrage and
called for him to be fired.<sup>\[14\]</sup>