---
title: Namibian General Strike (1971)
permalink: /Namibian_General_Strike_(1971)/
---

The **Namibian General Strike of 1971** was a [general
strike](List_of_General_Strikes "wikilink") in
[Namibia](Namibia "wikilink") (then a part of [South
Africa](South_Africa "wikilink")) that occurred in
[1971](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Southern_Africa "wikilink")
and [1972](Revolutions_of_1967_-_1975 "wikilink"), led by indigenous
Ovambo attempting to gain greater workers rights and struggling against
the governments [Apartheid](Apartheid_(South_Africa) "wikilink")
policies.

## Background

After [World War I](World_War_I "wikilink") and the
[collapse](German_Revolution_(1918) "wikilink") of the German Empire,
South Africa gained the former german colony and began to force people
there to live under the Apartheid system. In addition to this,
indigenous people were required to perform [forced
labor](Slavery "wikilink") for [capitalists](Capitalism "wikilink"),
peaceful protests and petitions to end this system began in 1957 but
were largely ineffective.

## Events

In June of 1971, strikes began, police arrested strikers but failed to
contain the unrest.

From August to December Church leaders met with the South African Prime
Minister and the Commissioner General for Northern Native Territories,
Jan De Wet. Negotiations during this time were unsuccessful. At one of
these meetings De Wet even stated that the system was voluntary and
that, if Ovambos and other native Namibians were against the contract
system, they would not ask for the contracts. The truth is that there
was no other way for them to earn a living. Miners, cleaners, healthcare
workers, builders and cooks all went on strike. After two days of
government-striker negotiations in Grootfontein, Namibia, the South
African government officially abolished the contract labor system. The
new regulations allowed laborers to apply for jobs at labor
bureaucracies in Ovamboland. The workers could choose their jobs and
were paid based on the type of work and individual contracts. Both
laborers and employers could end the contract at any time. Employers had
to provide free medical care. There was no provision for family
accompaniment to places of work.

Many workers felt that poor conditions were still present within this
new system and so continued to strike. Church leaders spoke out against
the new system, just as they had spoken out against the contract labor
system. On January 26, the South African government sent troops to
Ovamboland to keep order. The next day there was a news blackout within
the tribal area. Throughout the whole ordeal police broke up meetings
with violence, killing ten Ovambos. Two more Ovambo strikers were killed
by fellow tribesmen that were against the strikes and the South African
government exiled 20 clergymen from Ovamboland.

On February 4, South Africa declared emergency laws that banned
gatherings of more than five people in Ovamboland.

On February 14, twelve strikers were put on trial for breaking contract
and starting the general strike. Most charges were dropped when the
trial ended in June. The trial revealed many of the horrific conditions
in the labor compounds.

Workers continued strikes until April in protest of the unchanged
conditions under the new system. During this time the Secretary-General
of the U.N. met with Ovambo leaders to hear their stories.

## Results

The strike led to an end of forced labour and a greater desire for an
independent Namibia. Workers rights were signifi

## References

[Global Nonviolent Action
Database](Global_Nonviolent_Action_Database "wikilink") -
<https://nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu/content/ovambo-migrant-workers-general-strike-rights-namibia-1971-72>