---
title: Nestor Makhno
permalink: /Nestor_Makhno/
---

**Nestor Ivanovich Makhno** or **Bat'ko**(1889 - 1934) was an
[anarcho-"communist"](Anarcho-Communism "wikilink") warlord, commander
of the gang of anti-Bolshevik thugs and bandits known as the [Black
Army](Revolutionary_Insurrectionary_Army_of_Ukraine "wikilink") (and
considered a "military genius", if you count never winning a battle to
be genius) during the [Russian Civil War](Russian_Civil_War "wikilink")
(which defended the [Free Territory of
Ukraine](Free_Territory_of_Ukraine "wikilink")) and one of the
ideological founders of [Platformism](Platformism "wikilink").

## Born

### Childhood

Born to a poor [peasant](Peasants "wikilink") family in Gulyai-Polye,
Ukraine to a family of six boys, his father died before he turned a year
old. He began working [tending cows and sheep](Agriculture "wikilink")
for the local peasantry, later working as a farm laborer and in a
[factory](factory "wikilink").

### Imprisonment

In 1906, a year after the failed [Russian
Revolution](Russian_Revolution_(1905) "wikilink"), he joined an
anarchist group in Gulyai-Polye at age 17, and was arrested and
imprisoned to years later for involvement around the murder of a police
officer. He was originally sentenced to death, but was instead changed
to life in [prison](prison "wikilink") in Butyrki prison in Moscow
because of his youth. He hated life in prison and was unable to accept
the strict discipline, leading to him frequently being placed in
solidarity confinement and tortured. But he shared a prison cell with
the older anarchist [Peter Arshinov](Peter_Arshinov "wikilink") who
taught him about [Bakunin](Mikhail_Bakunin "wikilink") and
[Kropotkin](Peter_Kropotkin "wikilink"). He was released from prison in
1917, as the [February
Revolution](February_Revolution_(Russia) "wikilink") gave amnesty to
political prisoners.

### Return

He returned to his native village and helped organize a [trade
union](Trade_Union "wikilink") for farm laborers. He was also elected
chairman of the local union of carpenters and metalworkers and the
Gulyai-Polye [Soviet of Workers' and Peasants'
Deputies](Soviets "wikilink"). In August 1917, he recruited several
armed peasants and began forcefully expropriating land from the wealthy
in the area and redistributing it to the peasantry, making him a hero,
compared to [Stenka Razin](Stenka_Razin "wikilink") and [Yemelyan
Pugachev](Yemelyan_Pugachev "wikilink").

The signing of the [Treaty of
Brest-Litovsk](Treaty_of_Brest-Litovsk "wikilink") (ceding much of
Ukraine to the German and Austrian empires) led to him going into hiding
as soldiers began to occupy towns, and he escaped to Moscow, arriving in
June 1918. He arranged a meeting with Peter Kropotkin and later one at
the Kremlin with [Vladimir Lenin](Vladimir_Lenin "wikilink"), where he
argued that anarchists were a realistic and effective group, and Lenin
helped offer him to return to Ukraine.

### Black Army

Nestor returned to Gulyai-Polye in July 1918, and the area was occupied
by Austrian troops and by the militia of their Ukrainian puppet, Hetman
Skoropadsky. Organising the [Black
Army](Black_Army_(Ukraine) "wikilink"), Makhno launched a series of
raids against the Austrians and Hetmanites and against the manors of the
nobility. He used tachnakas and horses in several battles between the
Dnieper river and the Sea of Azov, attracting independent bands of
guerillas, villagers and anarchists. He became incredibly popular among
[peasants](peasants "wikilink"), often freely providing his army with
fresh food and horses, allowing them to travel up to 80 kilometers a day
with little difficulty.

The Black Army would launch successful hit-and-run attacks on noble
manors and military garrisons and quickly disappear into the steppes.
They often stole uniforms of the enemy army and disguised themselves as
such to spy and perform quick sneak attacks. If cornered, they would
bury their weapons, walk to a nearby village and work in the fields,
resembling ordinary peasants. Several defeats of Austrian and German
soldiers and his humour led to the nickname "Bat'ko" (little father) by
his soldiers.

The Austrians and Germans left Ukraine as [World War
I](World_War_I "wikilink") came to an end, leading to the Black Army
using their abandoned guns, tools, food, clothing and vehicles for
themselves. He took the city of Ekaterinoslav by hiding himself and his
troops on a train in ordinary clothing and attacking nationalists in the
city by surprise. But had to flee across the Dnieper river to
Gulyai-Polye after reinforcements came. He oversaw many congresses of
[village assemblies](Democratic_Assembly "wikilink") and workers'
councils in Gulyai-Polye and formed an alliance with the Bolsheviks, who
worked together to destroy much of the White Army in Ukraine.

### Tensions with the Bolsheviks

Such gestures, however, could not conceal the underlying hostility
between the two groups. The Communists had little taste for the
autonomous status of the Insurgent Army or for the powerful attraction
it exerted on their own peasant recruits. The Makhnovists, on their
side, feared that sooner or later the Red Army would attempt to bring
their movement to heel. As friction increased, the Soviet newspapers
abandoned their eulogies of the Makhnovists and began to attack them as
"bandits." In April 1919 the Third Regional Congress of Peasants,
Workers, and Insurgents met in defiance of a ban placed on it by the
Soviet authorities. In May two Cheka agents sent to assassinate Makhno
were caught and executed. The final breach occurred when the Makhnovists
called a Fourth Regional Congress for June 15 and invited the soldiers
of the Red Army to send representatives. Trotsky, commander in chief of
the Bolshevik forces, was furious. On June 4 he banned the congress and
outlawed Makhno. Communist troops carried out a lightning raid on
Gulyai-Polye and dissolved the agricultural communes set up by the
Makhnovists. A few days later. Denikin's forces arrived and completed
the job, liquidating the local Soviets as well.

The shaky alliance was hastily resumed that summer, when Denikin's drive
towards Moscow sent both the Communists and the Makhnovists reeling.
During August and September Makhno's guerrillas were pushed back towards
the western borders of the Ukraine. On September 26, however, Makhno
launched a successful counterattack at the village of Peregonovka, near
Uman, cutting the White general's supply lines and creating panic and
disorder in his rear. This was Denikin's first serious reverse in his
advance into the Russian heartland and an important factor in halting
his drive towards the Bolshevik capital. By the end of the year, a
counteroffensive by the Red Army had forced Denikin to beat a retreat to
the shores of the Black Sea.

At the end of 1919, Makhno received instructions from the Red \[116\]
command to transfer his troops to the Polish front. The order was
plainly designed to draw the Insurgent Army away from its home
territory, leaving it open to the establishment of Bolshevik rule.
Makhno refused to budge. Trotsky, he said, wanted to replace Denikin's
forces with the Red Army and the dispossessed landlords with political
commissars. Having vowed to cleanse Russia of anarchism "with an iron
broom,"<sup>4</sup> Trotsky replied by again outlawing the Makhnovists.
There ensued eight months of bitter struggle, with losses heavy on both
sides. A severe typhus epidemic augmented the toll of victims. Badly
outnumbered, Makhno's partisans avoided pitched battles and relied on
the guerrilla tactics they had perfected in more than two years of civil
war.

Hostilities were broken off in October 1920, when Baron Wrangel,
Denikin's successor in the south, launched a major offensive, striking
northwards from the Crimea. Once more the Red Army enlisted Makhno's
aid, in return for which the Communists agreed to an amnesty for all
anarchists in Russian prisons and guaranteed the anarchists freedom of
propaganda on condition that they refrain from calling for the overthrow
of the Soviet government.

Barely a month later, however, the Red Army had made sufficient gains to
ensure victory in the Civil War, and the Soviet leaders tore up their
agreement with Makhno. Not only had the Makhnovists outlived their
usefulness as a military partner, but as long as the bat'ko was at large
the spirit of anarchism and the danger of a peasant rising would remain
to haunt the Bolshevik regime. On November 25, 1920, Makhno's commanders
in the Crimea, fresh from their victory over Wrangel, were seized by the
Red Army and shot. The next day, Trotsky ordered an attack on Makhno's
headquarters in Gulyai-Polye, during which Makhno's staff were captured
and imprisoned or shot on the spot. The bat'ko himself, however,
together with a remnant of an army that had once numbered in the tens of
thousands, managed to elude his pursuers. After wandering over the
Ukraine for the better part of a year, the guerrilla leader, exhausted
and suffering from unhealed wounds, crossed the Dniester River into
Rumania and eventually found his way to Paris.

Finally, the last years of Makhno's life deserve fuller treatment than
they have received from historians. Of all the writers to date, Malcolm
Menzies and Alexandre Skirda have provided the most satisfactory
accounts of this period.<sup>22</sup> Yet even they have not told the
full and dramatic story of Makhno's escape across the Dniester, his
internment in Rumania, his escape to Poland, his arrest, trial, and
acquittal, his flight to Danzig, renewed imprisonment and final escape
(aided by Berkman \[124\] and other comrades in Europe),<sup>23</sup>
and his ultimate sanctuary in Paris, where he lived his remaining years
in obscurity, poverty, and disease, an Antaeus cut off from the soil
that might have replenished his strength. According to Berkman, Makhno
in Paris dreamed of returning to his native land and "taking up again
the struggle for liberty and social justice."<sup>24</sup> He had always
hated the "poison" of big cities, cherishing the natural environment in
which he was born. How ironic that he should have ended his days in a
great foreign capital, working in an automobile factory, a restless
consumptive for whom drink provided meager relief.

Yet he never lost his passion for anarchism, never abandoned the
movement to which he had dedicated his life. He attended anarchist
meetings (frequenting, among others, the Jewish Autodidact Club),
defended the *Organizational Platform* of his old comrade Arshinov, and
mingled with anarchists from all over the world, including a group of
Chinese students and also Durruti and Ascaso from Spain, whom he regaled
with his adventures in the Ukraine and offered his help when the moment
for their own struggle should arrive. Though death intervened to prevent
this, it is of interest that a number of veterans of his Insurgent Army
did in fact go to fight in the Durruti column in 1936.<sup>25</sup> How
fitting, then, that the Spanish comrades should have provided financial
assistance when Makhno lay mortally ill with tuberculosis.

### Death

Nestor died as a result of complications from tuberculosis at age 45.
His body was cremated, the ashes buried in the Pere-La-chaise cemetery
in Paris, near the mass grave of the
[Communards](Paris_Commune "wikilink") who were murdered in the [Bloody
Week](Bloody_Week_(Paris) "wikilink").

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialism](Category:Libertarian_Socialism "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialists](Category:Libertarian_Socialists "wikilink")
[Category:Anarchists](Category:Anarchists "wikilink")
[Category:Anarchism](Category:Anarchism "wikilink")
[Category:Anarcho-Communism](Category:Anarcho-Communism "wikilink")
[Category:Anarcho-Communists](Category:Anarcho-Communists "wikilink")
[Category:Ukraine](Category:Ukraine "wikilink") [Category:Black Army
(Ukraine)](Category:Black_Army_(Ukraine) "wikilink")