---
title: Ningbo Anti-Refinery Campaign (2012)
permalink: /Ningbo_Anti-Refinery_Campaign_(2012)/
---

The **Ningbo Anti-Refinery Campaign of 2012** was a grassroots
[environmental campaign](Timeline_of_Environmentalism.md "wikilink") to
stop the construction of a [petrochemical](Fossil_Fuels#Oil.md "wikilink")
[refinery](Factory.md "wikilink") in the city of Ningbo, Zhejian,
[China](China.md "wikilink") in
[2012](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Eastern_Asia.md "wikilink").

## Background

Just two weeks before the once-per-decade Communist Party congress to
announce the party’s new leadership, farmers in the Zhenhai district of
Zhejiang province expressed their concerns about pollution and the
increasing number of internal organ diseases and cancer in the area by
starting a campaign against the proposed expansion of the Zhenhai
Refining & Chemical petrochemical plant. The plant was affiliated with
Ningbo Sinopec, a branch of the state-owned Sinopec petroleum company. A
survey on the number of chemical plants in the area revealed that the
closest plant was only 1.5 km from a local village although the proper
distance should have been at least 100 km away.

## Events

The campaign began on the 22nd of October 2012 when 200 farmers and
local residents took a sit-in to the streets, blocking roads to a
government building. They demanded that the state-backed chemical plants
move out. They carried banners reading “We want to live, we want to
survive.” Police blocked all major roads in the area to maintain order.

No details were found on the protest for the 23rd to the 25th of
October, but on Friday, 26th of October, the protests turned violent as
thousands of protesters blocking the streets attacked police cars and
threw bricks and water bottles at police officers. Police beat
protesters with batons and used tear gas on them. They also dragged away
protesters who dared to chant slogans. People expressed their concerns
about the chemical plant’s production of ethylene and paraxylene (PX), a
toxic petrochemical used in plastics, paints, and cleaning solvents, by
wearing surgical masks painted with crossed out “PX” and other slogans.
By the afternoon the next day, police dispersed protesters gathered in a
central shopping street. Protesters had been giving out pamphlets
denouncing the chemical plant expansion. Police used tear gas and
detained about 100 people who were later released. Although protesters
had been uploading pictures and news of the protests onto Weibo, a
Chinese micro-blogging site, the government continued to censor much
information regarding the issue and events. Some demonstrators also
helped distribute food and water and pick up trash. Approximately 20,000
to 30,000 people participated during the peak of the protests. The
campaigners, and presumably the leaders as well, responded to the
violence nonviolently by spreading via Weibo (and making viral) an image
reading "I love Ningbo" and "We don't want violence, but we must have
good health".

On Sunday, the 28th of October, thousands of students and middle class
residents had gathered in Ningbo’s downtown square, carrying homemade
banners and wearing surgical masks with skulls and bones and slogans
such as “Protect Ningbo,” and “Return my health” painted on them. The
government gave in to the protesters’ demands that night, announcing
that they would halt the expansion project while they complete a
“scientific review.” On Monday, the 29th of October, 200 people staged a
sit-in, but police dispersed the group, arresting a few of the
protesters.

## Results

The government agreed to halt the expansion, but did not remove it which
many protesters wanted.

## See Also

- [Chinese Protest Wave (2007 -
  2014)](Chinese_Protest_Wave_(2007_-_2014).md "wikilink")
- [Shifang Anti-Factory
  Campaign](Shifang_Anti-Factory_Campaign_(2012).md "wikilink")

## References

[Global Nonviolent Action
Database](Global_Nonviolent_Action_Database.md "wikilink") - [Chinese
residents and students stop petrochemical plant expansion in Ningbo,
2012](https://nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu/content/chinese-residents-and-students-stop-petrochemical-plant-expansion-ningbo-2012)

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink")
[Category:2012](Category:2012.md "wikilink")
[Category:2010s](Category:2010s.md "wikilink") [Category:21st
Century](Category:21st_Century.md "wikilink")
[Category:China](Category:China.md "wikilink")
[Category:Asia](Category:Asia.md "wikilink") [Category:Eastern
Asia](Category:Eastern_Asia.md "wikilink")
[Category:Environmentalism](Category:Environmentalism.md "wikilink")
[Category:Social Movements](Category:Social_Movements.md "wikilink")