---
title: Norwegian Syndicalist Federation
permalink: /Norwegian_Syndicalist_Federation/
---

The **Norwegian Syndicalist Federation** (**NSF**) is a
[federation](Confederation "wikilink") of
[anarcho-syndicalist](Anarcho-Syndicalism "wikilink") groups across
[Norway](Norway "wikilink"). It is the Norweigian section of the
[International Workers'
Association](International_Workers'_Association "wikilink").

## History

### Origins

Following the [1909 General Strike in
Sweden](Swedish_General_Strike_(1909) "wikilink") (which also helped
created the
[SAC](Central_Organisation_of_the_Workers_of_Sweden "wikilink")), many
Swedish workers immigrated to Norway to avoid blacklisting and arrest in
[Sweden](Sweden "wikilink"). This led to many anarcho-syndicalists
living in Norway, leading to formation of SAC-supported local
organisations which fought for workers' rights. Stonemasons created most
of these organisations and people became cynical about the use of
[reformism](reformism "wikilink") and existing [trade
unions](Trade_Union "wikilink"). Facing the growing competition with
trade union, these local organisations united at a conference in Oslo on
the 3rd of July, 1916 and the NSF was formed.

### Harsh Early Years

The NSF became popular among stonemasons, miners and construction
workers, notably in the North. Many of the Swedish immigrants were
deported, nearly destroying the organisation as police repression
followed on Norwegian workers. It reached a peak in 1920 with 3,100
members and became relatively inactive outside of feminist causes
throughout the rest of the 1920s and 1930s. During [World War
II](World_War_II "wikilink"), many members were arrested and killed by
the [new government](Nazi_Germany "wikilink").

### Decline

After [World War II](World_War_II "wikilink"), [social
democracy](Social_Democracy "wikilink") took hold in Norway, causing
people to move away from radical unions and into liberal ones. One local
organisation after another was dissolved, and soon the NSF only had one
member under the age of 70. They lost control of any buildings and only
met informally in private homes, with the organisation finally
dissolving in 1973.

### Reorganisation

In 1977, old veterans of the NSF and young workers reorganisated the
federation, creating a contact network and formed a new trade union. It
has begun publishing newspapers and supports strikes in Norway.[^1]

## References

<references />

[Category:Characters](Category:Characters "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialism](Category:Libertarian_Socialism "wikilink")
[Category:Anarchism](Category:Anarchism "wikilink")
[Category:Anarcho-Syndicalism](Category:Anarcho-Syndicalism "wikilink")
[Category:Anarcho-Syndicalist
Groups](Category:Anarcho-Syndicalist_Groups "wikilink")
[Category:Norway](Category:Norway "wikilink") [Category:Northern
Europe](Category:Northern_Europe "wikilink")
[Category:Europe](Category:Europe "wikilink")
[Category:Scandanavia](Category:Scandanavia "wikilink")
[Category:International Workers'
Association](Category:International_Workers'_Association "wikilink")

[^1]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") -
    <https://no.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norsk_Syndikalistisk_F%C3%B8derasjon>