---
title: Notes on Building a Movement for Direct Democracy
permalink: /Notes_on_Building_a_Movement_for_Direct_Democracy/
---

**Notes on Building a Movement for Direct Democracy** is a 2004 article
by [James Herod](James_Herod.md "wikilink") which gives 10 pieces of advice
to building a movement towards direct democracy.

## Transcript

<strong>And to Ditch Representative Government at All levels (group,
organization, city, state, nation, world)</strong>

By ‘Direct Democracy’ I mean decision-making in assemblies through
face-to-face discussion, deliberation, and voting, and an association of
such assemblies built up through negotiated agreements (pacts,
treaties), not through federation (or confederation) using delegates.
The term has also been widely used in recent years to refer to
referendums and recalls, which is an unfortunate restriction and
weakening of the concept, which originally referred to direct
participatory democracy, as in a town meeting. I stick to the original
meaning of the term.

#### On the Ground

<strong>1.</strong> All activists who are in a position to do so (and
are interested in direct democracy) should attempt to establish either a
[neighborhood assembly, a workplace assembly, or an extended household
assembly](Democratic_Assembly.md "wikilink") (that is, the merging of small
households, families, and individuals in a neighborhood to form larger
units of 50-100 people). These are the social forms through which we
will be able to defeat capitalists and build a new social world. This
should take priority over other more common activities like setting up
infoshops, protesting in the streets, feeding the poor, and even over
building organizations of anarchists for the purposes of propaganda and
agitation.

#### In the Movement

<strong>2.</strong> The split in the movement over neighborhood versus
workplace organizing must be overcome. Direct democracy activists need
to launch a campaign to convince anarcho-syndicalists that under anarchy
all cooperative projects will come under community control (for
allocation of resources, or for decisions to start up, or shut down, for
example). Libertarian municipalists need to be convinced that struggles
at the workplace are an integral part of defeating capitalists. If this
campaign of persuasion fails, a new wing of the movement needs to be
built which integrates the two tactics (and adds struggles for
self-governing, expanded households).

<strong>3.</strong> So-called ‘individualist anarchists’ need to be
convinced that individual freedom is a social achievement, and that
anarchy is not merely "an aggregate of autonomous individuals" but new
social forms through which genuine self-government can be achieved.
Failing in this, which seems likely, a movement for direct democracy
(i.e., anarchy, communism) must simply bypass, and sideline, as far as
possible, the individualists, who represent the greatest threat, within
the movement, to the revolutionary struggle for freedom.

<strong>4.</strong> A campaign needs to be launched to try to persuade
nongovernmental organizations, almost all of which are based on
hierarchical, managerial structures, to convert to direct democracy.
Similarly, all the organizations which we ourselves create, whether
publishing projects, bookstores, media projects, or single-purpose
initiatives, need to operate on the basis of direct democracy, not
through the typical practice of electing officers. Many, perhaps most,
of the existing worker co-ops have reverted to managerial structures,
although many of them started out as directly democratic projects. This
needs to be reversed. A campaign might even be launched to convince the
twenty thousand small towns left in the United States with a population
of 10,000 or less to ditch representative government (mayors, city
councils), in favor of direct democracy. Nothing is stopping them, and
it would be easy to do, if they only wanted to.

<strong>5.</strong> Direct Democracy should be practiced in regional
associations. A common structural form in many radical organizations
(e.g., [Students for a Democratic
Society](Students_for_a_Democratic_Society.md "wikilink") in the ‘60s, and
[Northeastern Federation of
Anarcho-Communists](Northeastern_Federation_of_Anarcho-Communists.md "wikilink")
today) is to have local member collectives or chapters which are bound
together through an annual general assembly, which sets policy for the
whole organization. I believe this structure should be abandoned.
Instead, proposals should be discussed and voted on in each local
collective, but with the votes being tallied across all collectives.
Nefac has in fact invented a procedure for doing this, but they use it
only for minor things. There could still be an annual general meeting.
It’s just that it wouldn’t be a decision-making body.

<strong>6.</strong> An effort should be made by anarchist groups and
organizations to link up with the existing networks of worker and
consumer co-ops.

#### In the Media

<strong>7.</strong> A magazine is badly need which will ferret out and
publicize actual experiments in direct democracy taking place all over
the world. It would be a project to help the movement for direct
democracy (if in fact there is one) become conscious of itself,
something similar to what the [Grassroots Economic
Organizing](Grassroots_Economic_Organizing.md "wikilink") newsletter has
done for the movement for self-managing [worker
co-ops](Worker_Cooperative.md "wikilink").

<strong>8.</strong> Beyond this there is simply a need for more
propaganda work, to try to get the concept of direct democracy back into
the air, and to get reports on experiments into as many media outlets as
possible.

#### In Theory

<strong>9.</strong> As far as I know, there is not a single, adequate,
full-scale, scholarly book which defends direct democracy in opposition
to representative government. This shortcoming ought to be overcome as
soon as possible.

<strong>10.</strong> The concept of Federation (or confederation) needs
to be scuttled. It compromises the movement for direct democracy, and
prevents us from inventing procedures for building territorial
associations of directly democratic assemblies, through either
negotiated agreements or territory wide vote tallying.

## External Links

- [Notes on Building a Movement for Direct
  Democracy](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/james-herod-notes-on-building-a-movement-for-direct-democracy)
  at [theanarchistlibrary.org](theanarchistlibrary.org.md "wikilink")

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink") [Category:James
Herod](Category:James_Herod.md "wikilink")
[Category:Articles](Category:Articles.md "wikilink")
[Category:Democracy](Category:Democracy.md "wikilink")