---
title: Oka Uprising
permalink: /Oka_Uprising/
---

The **Oka Uprising** (or **Oka Crisis** in the [Canadian
media](Mass_Media "wikilink")) was an
[indigenist](Indigenism "wikilink")
[uprising](List_of_Libertarian_Socialist_Revolutions "wikilink") against
the illegal expropriation of sacred
[Mohawk](Haudenosaunee_Confederacy "wikilink") land by
[capitalists](Ruling_Class "wikilink") in Oka, Quebec,
[Canada](Canada "wikilink") in
[1990](Timeline_of_Indigenism "wikilink").

## Background

Mohawk people first settled in the Montreal area in the early 18th
century, moving north from their homeland in the Hudson River valley.
They displaced the Wyandot people (or Hurons) native to the area, with
whom the [Haudenosaunee](Haudenosaunee "wikilink") (of which the Mohawk
were a tribe) had long been in conflict, and who had been weakened
through prolonged contact with [French
settlers](French_Empire "wikilink"). Mohawk settlement in the St
Lawrence river valley was influenced to a great extent by French Jesuit
missionaries who sought converts from among the Mohawk and who
established Jesuit missionary villages for them at Kahnawake and
Kahnesatake.

In 1717, the governor of New France had granted the lands encompassing
"the Pines" and the Pine Hill Cemetery, where local Mohawk ancestors had
been buried, (and to whom it was considered sacred burial ground) to the
Society of the Priests of Saint Sulpice or Sulpician Fathers Seminary, a
Roman Catholic order that was based out of Paris, France. In 1868, one
year after Confederation, the chief of the Oka Mohawk people, Joseph
Onasakenrat, wrote a letter to the seminary claiming that its grant had
included about nine square miles reserved for Mohawk use in trust of the
seminary, and that the seminary had neglected this trust by granting
themselves (the seminary) sole ownership rights. In 1869 Onasakenrat
attacked the seminary with a small armed force after having given the
missionaries eight days to hand over the land. Local authorities ended
this stand-off with force.

In 1936, the seminary sold the territory under protest by the local
Mohawk community. At the time they still kept cattle on the [common
land](Commons "wikilink"). By 1956, the Mohawk were left to six
remaining square kilometers from their original 165. In 1959, the town
approved the development of a private nine-hole golf course, the *Club
de golf d'Oka*, on a portion of the disputed land. The Mohawk suit filed
against the development did not succeed. Construction also began on a
parking lot and golf greens adjacent to the Mohawk cemetery.

In 1977, the Kanehsatà:ke band filed an official land claim with the
federal Office of Native Claims regarding the land. The claim was
accepted for filing and funds were provided for additional research of
the claim. In 1986 the claim was rejected on the basis that it failed to
meet key legal criteria. In March 1989, the *Club de golf d'Oka*
announced plans to expand the golf course by an additional nine holes.
As the Office of Native Claims had rejected the Mohawk claim on the land
three years earlier, his office did not consult the Mohawk on the plans.
No environmental or historic preservation review was undertaken.
Protests by Mohawks and others, as well as concern from the Quebec
Minister of the Environment, led to negotiations and a postponement of
the project by the municipality in August pending a court ruling on the
development's legality. In 1990, the court found in favour of the
developers and the mayor of Oka, Jean Ouellette, announced that the
remainder of the pines would be cleared to expand the golf course to
eighteen holes and to construct 60 condominiums. Not all residents of
Oka approved of the plans, but opponents found the mayor's office
unwilling to discuss them.<sup>\[16\]</sup>

## Crisis

As a protest against the court decision to allow the golf course
expansion to proceed, some members of the Mohawk community erected a
barricade blocking access to the area. Mayor Ouellette demanded
compliance with the court order, but the land defenders refused.
Quebec's Minister of Native Affairs John Ciaccia wrote a letter of
support for the Mohawk, stating that "these people have seen their lands
disappear without having been consulted or compensated, and that, in my
opinion, is unfair and unjust, especially over a golf
course."<sup>\[17\]</sup>

On July 11, the mayor asked the Sûreté du Québec (SQ), Quebec's
provincial police force, to intervene with the Mohawk protest, citing
alleged criminal activity at the barricade. The Mohawk people, in
accordance with the Constitution of the Iroquois Confederacy, asked the
women, the caretakers of the land and "progenitors of the nation",
whether or not the arsenal which the Mohawk Warrior Society had amassed
should remain.

The SQ deployed an RCMP Emergency Response Team (ERT) (French: *Groupe
tactique d'intervention*), a police tactical unit, which responded to
the barricade by deploying tear gas canisters and concussion
grenades<sup>\[9\]\[10\]</sup> in an attempt to force the Mohawks to
disperse. In response, gunfire ensued from both sides,<sup>\[9\]</sup>
and after a 15-minute gun battle the police fell back, abandoning six
cruisers and a bulldozer. Although an initial account reported that
31-year-old SQ Corporal Marcel Lemay had been shot in the face during
the firefight,<sup>\[18\]</sup> a later inquest determined that the
bullet which struck and eventually killed him struck his "left side
below the armpit, an area not covered by \[his\] bullet-proof
vest".<sup>\[19\]</sup>

Before the raid there were approximately 30 armed Mohawks in and around
the barricade; following the gun battle this number grew to 60–70 and
would later swell to 600.<sup>\[1\]</sup> The Mohawks seized six
vehicles, including four police cars, and commandeered the front-end
loader to crush the vehicles and use them to form a barricade across the
main highway.<sup>\[20\]</sup>

Members of the Seton Lake Indian Band blockade the BC Rail line in
support of Oka, while a Royal Canadian Mounted Police officer looks on.
Later in the day, several of the elders protesting were arrested, and a
confrontation with the band community ensued as Mounties marched the
squad cars holding those arrested through the reserve en route to
Lillooet.

The Mohawks established a network for communications between the Mohawk
villages Akwesasne, Kanesatake and Kahnawake, that used hand-held
radios, cellular phones, air raid sirens and fire hall bells, as well as
local radio stations, and human patrols.<sup>\[10\]</sup> The situation
escalated as the local Mohawks were joined by Natives from across the
country and the United States. Despite pressure to do so, their
barricade was not dismantled.<sup>\[10\]</sup> The Sûreté du Québec
established their own blockades on highway 344 to restrict access to Oka
and Kanesatake. Another group of Mohawks at the nearby location of
Kahnawake, in solidarity with Kanesatake, blockaded the Mercier Bridge
at the point where it passed through their territory, thereby sealing
off a major access point between the Island of Montreal and Montreal's
heavily populated South Shore suburbs.

At the peak of the crisis, the Mercier Bridge and Routes 132, 138 and
207 were all blocked, creating substantial disruption to traffic and
anger grew as the crisis dragged on. A group of frustrated Châteauguay
residents started building an unauthorized, unplanned roadway
circumventing the Kahnawake reserve. Long after the crisis, this
unfinished roadway was eventually incorporated into Quebec Autoroute 30.

Frustration over traffic congestion and diversion due to the bridge and
road blocks were occasionally expressed publicly. Residents of
Châteauguay burned an effigy of a Mohawk warrior while chanting
"*sauvages*" (savages).<sup>\[21\]</sup> Radio host Gilles Proulx raised
tensions with comments such as the Mohawks "couldn't even speak French".
These remarks inflamed tempers that had been running especially high
from comments preceding this crisis, including those by the federal
Member of Parliament for Châteauguay, Ricardo Lopez.<sup>\[22\]</sup>

On August 8, Quebec premier Robert Bourassa announced at a press
conference that he had, as per Section 275 of the *National Defence
Act*, requested military support in "aid of the civil power". Prime
Minister Brian Mulroney was reluctant to have the federal government
and, in particular, the Canadian Forces, so involved. Under the act,
however, the Solicitor General of Quebec, under direction from the
Premier of Quebec, had the right to requisition the armed forces to
maintain law and order as a provincial responsibility; this move had
precedent, including two decades earlier during the October Crisis,
during which Bourassa had requested and received military aid.

It was around this time that the SQ apparently lost control of the
situation, and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police were deployed on August
14. They were prohibited from using force and were soon overwhelmed by
riots caused by Mohawks and mobs created by the blocked traffic (during
the course of which, ten constables were
hospitalized).<sup>\[3\]\[*better source needed*\]</sup>

The Chief of the Defence Staff, General John de Chastelain, placed
Quebec-based troops in support of the provincial authorities; some 2,500
regular and reserve troops from the 34 and 35 Canadian Brigade Groups
and 5 Canadian Mechanized Brigade Group were put on notice. On August
20, a company of the Royal 22<sup>e</sup> Régiment, led by Major Alain
Tremblay, took over three barricades and arrived at the final blockade
leading to the disputed area. There, they reduced the stretch of no
man's land, originally implemented by the Sûreté du Québec before the
barricade at the Pines, from 1.5 kilometres to 5 metres. Additional
troops and mechanized equipment mobilized at staging areas around
Montreal, while reconnaissance aircraft flew air photo missions over
Mohawk territory to gather intelligence. Despite high tensions between
the two sides, no shots were exchanged.

## Results

On August 29, the Mohawks at the Mercier Bridge negotiated an end to
their protest blockade with Lieutenant-Colonel Robin Gagnon, the "Van
Doo" commander who had been responsible for the south shore of the St.
Lawrence River during the crisis. This stand-down eventually contributed
to the resolution of the original siege on the Kahnawake reserve, and on
September 26 the Mohawks there dismantled and burned some of their guns
and returned to the reserve after ceremonially burning
tobacco.<sup>\[23\]</sup>

Mohawks at Oka, however, felt betrayed at the loss of their most
effective bargaining chip in the Mercier Bridge: once traffic began
flowing again, the Quebec government rejected further negotiations
pursuant to their original dispute concerning the Oka golf course
expansion.<sup>\[23\]</sup> September 25 witnessed the final engagement
of the crisis: a Mohawk warrior walked around the perimeter of the
blockade area with a long stick, setting off flares that had been
originally installed by the Canadian Forces to alert them to individuals
fleeing the area. The soldiers turned a water hose on this man, but it
lacked enough pressure to disperse the crowd surrounding him. This crowd
taunted the soldiers and began throwing water balloons at them, but the
incident did not escalate further.<sup>\[24\]</sup>

Among those charged and convicted for their participation was Ronaldo
Casalpro (who used the alias Ronald "Lasagna" Cross during the
conflict). Casalpro was beaten by Sûreté du Québec officers after his
arrest, and while three were suspended without pay, the case took so
long to process that they had already left the force.<sup>\[25\]</sup>
Two SQ officers were suspended and investigated for allegedly beating
Casalpro while in captivity, but were not subsequently
charged.<sup>\[25\]</sup> Cross served a six-year sentence for assault
and weapons charges related to his role in the crisis and died of a
heart attack in November 1999.<sup>\[25\]</sup> Casalpro's brother,
Tracy Cross, later served as the best man at the wedding of slain SQ
Corporal Lemay's sister, Francine, who had reconciled with the community
after reading *At the Woods' Edge*, a history of
Kanesatake.<sup>\[26\]</sup>

The golf course expansion that had originally triggered the crisis was
cancelled and the land under dispute purchased from the developers by
the federal government for \$5.3 million.<sup>\[27\]</sup> The Oka
Crisis motivated the development of a national First Nations Policing
Policy to try to prevent future incidents, and brought Native issues
into the forefront in Canada.<sup>\[24\]</sup> In 1991, Ouellette was
re-elected mayor of Oka by acclamation. He later said of the crisis that
his responsibilities as mayor required him to act as he
did.<sup>\[28\]</sup>

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Indigenism](Category:Indigenism "wikilink")
[Category:Canada](Category:Canada "wikilink") [Category:North
America](Category:North_America "wikilink")
[Category:Uprisings](Category:Uprisings "wikilink")
[Category:Anti-Colonialism](Category:Anti-Colonialism "wikilink")
[Category:1990](Category:1990 "wikilink")
[Category:1990s](Category:1990s "wikilink") [Category:20th
Century](Category:20th_Century "wikilink") [Category:Indigenous
Uprisings](Category:Indigenous_Uprisings "wikilink")
[Category:Anti-Colonial
Uprising](Category:Anti-Colonial_Uprising "wikilink")
[Category:Golf](Category:Golf "wikilink")