---
title: Ono Tozaburo
permalink: /Ono_Tozaburo/
---

**Ono Tozaburo** (1903 - 1996) was an [anarchist](Anarchism "wikilink"),
[poet](Poetry "wikilink") and school principal.

## Life

Ono was born in Osaka in 1903 as it was rapidly industrialising and the
emergence of the young working class was accompanied by unrest and the
spreading of radical ideas. Born into a wealthy family of merchants, he
attended Tenojji Junior High School. He moved to Tokyo in 1921 and
attended the Culture Department of Toyo University. However, like many
other Japanese anarchist poets of the time, he dropped out after 8
months. He was an admirer of the fiery anarchist [Ōsugi
Sakae](Ōsugi_Sakae "wikilink"), and began contributing Aka to Kuro (Red
and Black), but was soon shut down by [police](police "wikilink").

In 1926, he launched Dam-Dam (Trajectory), an anarcho-Dadaist
publicatoin, but only one issue appeared. His first collection of poems
was rejected by all the publishers he approached, and in the end he had
to self-publish his Hanbun Hiraita Mado (A Half-Opened Window). In 1928
he translated and had published [Reflections on
Violence](Reflections_on_Violence "wikilink") by [Georges
Sorel](Georges_Sorel "wikilink"). He brought out a collection of
American proletarian poetry, which he and others had translated, in
1931.

He returned to Osaka in 1933 and wrote poems about the industrial
devastation he saw there and attempted to organise the workers' movement
with the cultural anarchist movement as was soon arrested by police, but
released due to lack of evidence. During [World War
II](World_War_II "wikilink"), he published anti-war poems and in 1954
opened the 'Osaka Literature School for Workers' and was its principal
for 37 years, running courses on novels, poetry and children's
literature, he also took a role in the anti-war movements of Japan.[^1]

## References

<references />

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialism](Category:Libertarian_Socialism "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialists](Category:Libertarian_Socialists "wikilink")
[Category:Anarchism](Category:Anarchism "wikilink")
[Category:Anarchists](Category:Anarchists "wikilink")
[Category:Japan](Category:Japan "wikilink") [Category:Eastern
Asia](Category:Eastern_Asia "wikilink")
[Category:Asia](Category:Asia "wikilink")
[Category:Poets](Category:Poets "wikilink")

[^1]: `         `[`Tozaburo, Ono (1903-1996)`](https://libcom.org/history/tozaburo-ono-1903-1996)` at `[`libcom.org`](libcom.org "wikilink")
    `       `