---
title: Osaka Uprising (1990)
permalink: /Osaka_Uprising_(1990)/
---

The **Osaka Uprising** of
[1990](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Eastern_Asia "wikilink") was
a [working class
uprising](List_of_Libertarian_Socialist_Revolutions "wikilink") in the
Nishi-Nari ward of Osaka, [Japan](Japan "wikilink").

## Background

October 2nd, 1990. The day started as any other does in Osaka's
Nishi-Nari ward, men lined up around the yoseba employment center, in
the thousands, waiting for work. If it came, they would load into the
cars of construction contractors in groups, with parachute pants and
wrapped heads. For eight hours they might wave light wands 'guiding
pedestrians', dig concrete roads, re-pave highways or variously break
their backs in the sun.

This proletarian fate was ceded by the city's bourgeoisie over a period
of thirty years of continuous unemployed unrest; all the union officials
touted it as labor 'won' from an inhuman system. After all, without
work, one does not eat, and once conditions have worsened to the point
that this phrase becomes dictatorial, one works in a fervor; for work
leads to 'independence'. Work might one day lead out of the slum. If
work didn't come, the men wait out lunch and line up for the daily
workfare handout, set aside for 'unsuccessful job-seekers'.

This yoseba is in Kamagasaki, a neighborhood of poverty and celebration,
a breathing lung, where the yakuza patrol day-workers with icy looks and
stashed weapons; at occupied 'triangle' park, men, dogs and blue canvas
spill out into the street sides. Udon and soba are served at improvised
stool stands roofed with canvas. Women and men prepare boxed lunches,
noodles and Okinawan fare at shops lining the crowded avenues. Just to
the east the brothel neighborhood of Tobita sits in expectant dormancy,
for the night will soon fall.

The slum is quiet. For the city hall and the construction capitalists,
it was just another Tuesday. There were multiple flashpoints, like any
riot, origins that became history for the individuals and groups that
experienced them. For most, the riots began with friends running past,
heaving paving stones at the police. But most will point to an account
of an old homeless man in the Namba theater district, north of
Kamagasaki. Police on patrol had stopped at his improvised blue canvas
house, berating him to leave the sidewalk.

## Events

The man (known by most as 'a bit bizarre') unleashed his dog, which
quickly sunk its teeth into a senior patrolman. After a struggle, he was
surrounded by police and beaten as a crowd gathered, consisting of other
homeless people and some day-workers. Hauled away and arrested, the
angry crowd followed the car to the Nishinari police station. News
spread on sprinting legs to the enormous yoseba hiring hall in the
south, circulating among groups of day laborers.

Without any particular confrontation, a few 'troublesome' workers were
pulled aside by the yoseba police patrol and in front of thousands,
beaten. The neighborhood exploded. Yoseba day-workers, witnesses in
their thousands, took their comrades back and drove the police from the
hiring hall, swarming outward like blood through Kamagasaki's lungs.
Crowds formed here and here, with a general movement towards the police
station, from which the police re-emerged.

A rain of stones fell. After the volleys reached a temporary abatement,
barricades were quickly erected, bicycles ignited with cheap lighter
fluid, stacked and burned, dumpsters dragged into the street.
<em>Capital's tendency to crisis, the proletarian form, was erupting.
</em>The police retreated in order to barricade the neighborhoods, to
shut off the arteries that connect Kamagasaki to the north, south, east
and west. A classic siege strategy was put into action punctuated by
sudden, violent streams of steel-shield armed police into the
neighborhoods.

Mobile riot squads surrounded the area with armored buses and paddy
wagons, and soon lined the boulevards in columns with five foot steel
shields. All the forces of government and private capital arrived to
contain thousands of revolting workers and rapidly arriving allies, to
circumscribe a space that was impassable for the surging rage of the
rioters. Media vans pulled up and were stoned if they attempted to
penetrate the riot line and 'get the real story'. In several cases
cameras were sought after and smashed.

All footage of the events comes from behind police lines. Advances by
the cops were met with volleys of objects flung from the parapets of
apartment buildings by the unemployed, workers and housewives. At times,
the riot constituted itself as a castle pocked with archers. When the
first barricaded day slipped into night, the cars of the construction
barons were smashed and degraded. Parks that had been evicted of
squatters had their locks broken and were re-taken.

The insurrection faced its own limit, against the borders of space drawn
by the state and its own projectuality. Discussions arose everywhere on
where to go next. Many feared that the riotous action would blacklist
the neighborhood from construction contracts, that the yoseba would
close like the one in Tokyo had just a year earlier, that poverty would
worsen. Most gazed over the surrounding steel buses of the riot police
and saw the impossibility of expansion, of the riot spreading to other
sectors.

NGO workers and city hall mediators arrived urging people to 'calm
down', that police violence could be 'addressed'. But these particular
beatings were only moments on a continuum of violent surveillance and
control. There was no doubt that the situation was in fact rapidly
worsening as police ran wild in the streets, smashing skulls and faces
with steel pipes and shields. The Kamagasaki population was at open
revolt with the organs of repression, most saw no way back to
'normality'.

Buses and sound-cars of the unions and organizations of the unemployed
mobilized from their garages and circled the neighborhood, providing a
temporary barrier; they eventually moving through police lines,
broadcasting messages to a wider portion of the city. Night fell
again."I edged back to the crowd. From behind me, someone yelled 'Aim
for the lights!'. Stones were thrown aiming towards the lights of TV
cameras stationed behind the riot squad.I entered the crowd.

No one took any notice of the camera that I held in my hand. After a
while, a man spoke to me. 'Are you from the news papers?' When I
answered no, he said, 'If you are, you are going to get killed.'"¬ù
<em>-anonymous observer at Kamagasaki </em>As the riot entered into its
third, fourth day the city's strategy was in continual escalation. The
rioting, unarmed workers were meat for the mobile riot squads. Largely
defensive formations changed into charges, five-foot steel shields were
leveled against the flesh of the disgusted.

Barricades collapsed or were extinguished, and the police made real
progress into the neighborhoods. If the streets could be cleared, then
the tear-gas buses and paddy wagons could move in. Hundreds of the most
militant were chased south into a union building where the insurrection
made its last, unarmed stand. Concurrently and further south, partly in
inspiration from the Kamagasaki rebellion, a youth revolt had exploded,
spearheaded by 'speed tribe' gangs on motorcycles who fought the police
in skirmishes.

This rebellion was contained even quicker, and most of the young rioters
found themselves chased into the same building with the older workers.
There would be no cavalry for Kamagasaki. The building was taken with
tremendous violence. The 22nd riot in the neighborhood's 30 year history
had ended. Despite the arrest and imprisonment of many, over the next
four years there would be more small riots, sporadically, where the
police or contractors were targeted. When unrest broke out, other
workers would come running; construction contractors dodging back-wages
found themselves at the mercy of mobs.

People took inspiration from the riots that raged through the
neighborhoods throughout the 1960s, contestation, above all was the
agenda! The strategy against the riot by the city and the bourgeoisie
was drawn from every lesson learned in the past forty years of class
struggle in post-fordist Japan. Initial direct force, followed by the
deployment of mediators, the deployment of advanced technological means
of repression, filtering of news about the riots, news blackouts,
concluding in total geographical isolation of the proletarian ferment.

Riots can not be permitted to spread to other sectors, and therefore
Japanese capital's only strategy against the eruption of its own
contradictions is containment.

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialism](Category:Libertarian_Socialism "wikilink")
[Category:Japan](Category:Japan "wikilink") [Category:Eastern
Asia](Category:Eastern_Asia "wikilink")
[Category:Asia](Category:Asia "wikilink") [Category:Worker
Uprisings](Category:Worker_Uprisings "wikilink")
[Category:Uprisings](Category:Uprisings "wikilink")
[Category:1990](Category:1990 "wikilink")
[Category:1990s](Category:1990s "wikilink")