---
title: Ours to Master and to Own: Workers' Control from the Commune to the Present
permalink: /Ours_to_Master_and_to_Own:_Workers'_Control_from_the_Commune_to_the_Present/
---

**Ours to Master and to Own: Workers' Control from the Commune to the
Present** is a [book](List_of_Libertarian_Socialist_Media "wikilink") by
[Immanuel Ness](Immanuel_Ness "wikilink") and [Dario
Azzellini](Dario_Azzellini "wikilink") (with contributions from other
authors) outlining a brief history of episodes of [workers'
control](Workers'_Self-Management "wikilink") and discussing various
philosophical questions around it. It covers episodes of workers'
control in Russia, [Spain](Spain "wikilink"), Italy, Chile, France,
Scotland, Germany, Yugoslavia, Poland, Indonesia, Algeria, Argentina,
Portugal, [Britain](United_Kingdom "wikilink"),
[USA](United_States_of_America "wikilink"), [Canada](Canada "wikilink"),
India, Venezuela and Brazil.

## Summary

### Part I: Workers’ Councils: Historical Overview and Theoretical Debate

#### Workers’ Control and Revolution - Victor Wallis

#### Workers’ Councils in Europe: A Century of Experience - Donny Gluckstein

#### The Red Mole: Workers’ Councils as a Means of Revolutionary Transformation - Sheila Cohen

#### The Political Form at Last Discovered: Workers’ Councils against the Capitalist State - Alberto R. Bonnet

### Part II: Workers’ Councils and Self-Administration in Revolution: Early Twentieth Century

#### From Unionism to Workers’ Councils: The Revolutionary Shop Stewards in Germany, 1914–1918 - Ralf Hoffrogge

#### The Factory Committee Movement in the Russian Revolution - David Mandel

#### Factory Councils in Turin, 1919–1920: “The Sole and Authentic Social Representatives of the Proletarian Class” - Pietro Di Paola

#### Workers’ Democracy in the Spanish Revolution, 1936–1937 - Andy Durgan

### Part III:Workers’ Control under State Socialism.

#### Yugoslavia: Workers’ Self-Management as State Paradigm Goran Music

#### Give Us Back Our Factories! Between Resisting Exploitation and the Struggle for Workers’ Power in Poland, 1944–1981 - Zbigniew Marcin Kowalewski

### Part IV: Anticolonial Struggle, Democratic Revolution, and Workers’ Control

#### Workers’ Control in Java, Indonesia, 1945–1946

Written by [Jafar Suryomenggolo.](Jafar_Suryomenggolo "wikilink") During
the [Indonesian National
Revolution](Indonesian_National_Revolution#Workers'_Self-Management "wikilink")
and [World War II](World_War_II "wikilink"), workers on the island of
[Java](Republic_of_Indonesia "wikilink") seized control of factories,
railroads and plantations from [managers](Boss "wikilink") in the
Japanese, Dutch and Indonesian states as part of resistance against the
brutality of [colonialism](colonialism "wikilink"). They produced
resources and provided transportation for
[anti-colonial](Anti-Colonialism "wikilink") forces and improved working
conditions rapidly under a regime of self-management/dikelola sendiri.
Despite this, the 'revolutionary' state soon betrayed the workers by
[nationalizing](Nationalization "wikilink") industry and imposing a new
class of [managers](Boss "wikilink"), workers who supported
self-management were dismissed as
[anarcho-syndicalists](Anarcho-Syndicalism "wikilink").

#### From Workers’ Self-Management to State Bureaucratic Control: Autogestion in Algeria

Written by [Samuel J. Southgate](Samuel_J._Southgate "wikilink"). During
the [Algerian Revolution](Algerian_Revolution "wikilink"), over 25,000
enterprises were taken over and run by their workers between 1962 and
1967 in the largest experiment in workers' self-management in human
history. The state was initially enthusiastic about these developments,
as it solved the countries economic crisis and allowed for many people
to support anti-colonial sentiments within the new state. The state soon
nationalized industry and changed the function of workers' councils,
installing their own bureaucrats to assist in production, and soon a new
wave of petty-tyrants and corruption hit the councils. Later, many firms
were [privatized](Privatization "wikilink") to newly formed
[corporations](Corporation "wikilink"), completely destroying workers'
control in the region.

#### The Limits and Possibilities of Workers’ Control within the State: Mendoza, Argentina, 1973

Written by [Gabriel Scodeller](Gabriel_Scodeller "wikilink"). Argentina
had been rocked by a string of US-backed military dictators since 1955,
but the country became a [representative
democracy](Representative_Democracy "wikilink") in 1973, triggering a
wave of workplace occupations to create workers' self-management and
Peronism (a mixture of [social democracy](Social_Democracy "wikilink")
and [nationalism](nationalism "wikilink") unique to Argentina). This
movement split into right-wing and left-wing factions, each favouring a
different nationalist or socialist vision of the future. Over 500
workplaces occupations were taken out, mainly in June which saw 350,
mainly in the public service sector. Each side carried out takeovers
with escalating intensity in order to try and establish as much support
among the population as possible. The occupations were destroyed by a
new military dictatorship and crumbled under their own internal
[contradictions](Contradiction_(Sociology) "wikilink"), such as the lack
of [class consciousness](Class_Consciousness "wikilink"), desire to
[work with](Reformism "wikilink") the [state](State_(Polity) "wikilink")
and failure to recognise the threat of
[counter-revolution](Counter-Revolution "wikilink").

#### Workers’ Councils in Portugal, 1974–1975 - Peter Robinson

### Part V: Workers’ Control against Capitalist Restructuring in the Twentieth Century

#### Workers’ Control and the Politics of Factory Occupation: Britain, 1970s - Alan Tuckman

#### Workers’ Direct Action and Factory Control in the United States

Written by [Immanuel Ness](Immanuel_Ness "wikilink"). Given that the USA
is the closest thing the world has to a capitalist paradise and the
power of trade unions is often heavily restricted, workers will often
resort to various [wildcat](Wildcat_Strike "wikilink") and spontaneous
actions in order to secure a great amount of workers rights. Beginning
with the [Toledo Strike](1934_Toledo_Strike "wikilink") in 1934, where
10,000 workers battled police who fired gas grenades and bullets into
the crowd. Workers began a wave of insurgencies throughout the 1930s,
sit-down strikes became common at places like tire and car factories.
The highly successful [Flint sit-down
strike](1936_Flint_Sit-Down_Strike "wikilink") in 1936 led to 400,000
workers participating in 477 sit-down strikes throughout the 1930s, and
between 1936 and 1939, workers occupied 583 workplaces. The US labor
movement became extremely passive following [World War
II](World_War_II "wikilink") by a combination of union-boss
collaboration, anti-communist fears, state repression, a large middle
class and the threat of offshoring jobs. However, beginning in the
2000s, a new wave of worker insurgency has begun, with the Delphi
Factory insurgency in 2005 and the Republic of Windows takeover in 2008.

#### “Hot Autumn”: Italy’s Factory Councils and Autonomous Workers’ Assemblies, 1970s

Written by [Patrick Cuninghame](Patrick_Cuninghame "wikilink").
Following the [1969 "Hot Autumn" Strike
Wave](1969_Italian_Hot_Autumn "wikilink"), traditional [trade
unions](Trade_Union "wikilink") in Italy had lost most of their power
(giving rise to the [workerist](Workerism "wikilink") and
[autonomist](Autonomism "wikilink") movements). Inspired by autonomists,
workers carried out the largest wave of unrest since the [Bienno
Rosso](Bienno_Rosso "wikilink") in 1919 and 1920. Rent, bill and
workplace strikes were organized to increase worker control of [surplus
value](Surplus_Value "wikilink") and to place extreme strain on
[capitalism](capitalism "wikilink") itself. Efforts to tame the unrest
via increased welfare measures and recognition of partial [workers'
councils](Workers'_Council "wikilink") failed. However, a combination of
fear brought on by the [Years of Lead](Years_of_Lead_(Italy) "wikilink")
caused people to retreat into private life, as well as the beginning of
[offshoring](offshoring "wikilink") of [factories](Factory "wikilink")
and aggressive state repression of the movement. However, the surviving
influence of Autonomism is still a big influence within Italian trade
unions (notably [COBAS](COBAS "wikilink")),
[squatting](squatting "wikilink") and the [Global Justice
Movement](Global_Justice_Movement "wikilink").

#### Recipe for Anarchy: British Columbia’s Telephone Workers’ Occupation of 1981 - Elaine Bernard

### Part VI: Workers’ Control, 1990–2010

#### Workers’ Control in India’s Communist-Ruled State: Labor Struggles and Trade Unions in West Bengal

Written by [Arup Kumar Sen](Arup_Kumar_Sen "wikilink"). India's brutal
poverty, [gender inequality](Patriarchy "wikilink") and exploitation by
foreign companies has been challenged on numerous occasions. In 1973,
the Sangoan Tea and Allied Plantation Workers Co-operative was nearly
shut down, and workers took it over as a [worker
co-operative](Worker_Co-operative "wikilink") in 1974, running it
successfully for the next three years until it was shut down by a court
order from the previous owners. In Kolkata in the late 1980s, over
twenty worker co-operatives were opened from bankrupt enterprises.
Throughout the 1990s and 2000s, many of these co-operatives came into
conflicts with the government, capitalists and trade unions over
accusations of crime and corruption.

#### Argentinean Worker-Taken Factories: Trajectories of Workers’ Control under the Economic Crisis

Written by [Marina Kabat](Marina_Kabat "wikilink"). Following the
[Argentinazo](Argentinazo "wikilink") in 2001 and the seizure of
hundreds of workplaces to be run as self-managed firms, many of these
enterprises struggled to survive throughout the 2000s. This was because
people who took over bankrupted enterprises would assume the debts of
their owner and/or have to deal with decaying machinery neglected by
capitalist owners. Combined with various legal loopholes set by the
state to destroy workplace democracy and many firms lacking a socialist
objective and thus contracting wage workers and opening up to investment
from shareholders. Despite this, many firms have persevered through
conditions that would destroy a capitalist economy, showing the
superiority of workers' self-management.

#### Workers’ Control under Venezuela’s Bolivarian Revolution - Dario Azzellini

#### Brazilian Recovered Factories: The Constraints of Workers’ Control - Maurício Sardá de Faria and Henrique T. Novae

## External Links

- PDF:
  <https://libcom.org/files/Ours%20to%20Master%20and%20to%20Own,%20Workers%E2%80%99%20Control%20from%20the%20Commune%20to%20the%20Present%20-%20Immanuel%20Ness,%20Dario%20Azzellini.pdf>

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialism](Category:Libertarian_Socialism "wikilink") [Category:Workers'
Self-Management](Category:Workers'_Self-Management "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Media](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Media "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Books](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Books "wikilink")