---
title: Pakistani Revolution (1968)
permalink: /Pakistani_Revolution_(1968)/
---

The **Pakistani Revolution of 1968** was a [six-month long wave of
unrest](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Southern_Asia.md "wikilink")
in [Pakistan](Pakistan.md "wikilink") that brought down the military
dictatorship which had ruled Pakistan for 11 years and saw a brief
window into the possibility of a democracy and even land reform. But,
the movement was somewhat co-opted by another military dictator who
continued to repress the country. The revolution was part of a wider
wave of revolts across the world in the [late 1960s and early
1970s](Revolutions_of_1967_-_1975.md "wikilink").

## Background

Since independence from the British Empire in 1947, Pakistan had only
seen 1 election (in 1947) and had otherwise been ruled by dictators that
presided over a corrupt and unequal country which had a small welfare
state and little rights for workers. After the revolutions of the late
1960s and early 1970s, many people began to turn this into anger.

## Events

Mobilisation began by socialist and liberal organisers in 1967, mainly
by the unemployed and students, with some students burning their degrees
in protests. After many protest marches were held, police opened fire on
one and killed 3 people, leading to an eruption in strikes, refusal to
pay public transport fares, more protests, road blockades which
paralysed the capital city and even the execution of landlords and
seizure of land by peasants. Police officers who attacked protesters
were also frequently killed.

## Results

After months of protests and violence, in March 1969 the army [defected
from the government](List_of_Mutinies.md "wikilink") and demanded the
presidents resignation, who complied and handed power to the army chief
who promised elections in 1970. But he soon became another military
dictator who presided over repression and a brutal [colonial war in
Bangladesh](Bangladeshi_Liberation_War.md "wikilink").

## References

[Global Nonviolent Action
Database](Global_Nonviolent_Action_Database.md "wikilink") -
<https://nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu/content/pakistani-students-workers-and-peasants-bring-down-dictator-1968-1969>

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink")
[Category:Pakistan](Category:Pakistan.md "wikilink")
[Category:Asia](Category:Asia.md "wikilink") [Category:Southern
Asia](Category:Southern_Asia.md "wikilink")
[Category:1968](Category:1968.md "wikilink")
[Category:1960s](Category:1960s.md "wikilink")
[Category:1969](Category:1969.md "wikilink") [Category:Revolutions of
1967 - 1975](Category:Revolutions_of_1967_-_1975.md "wikilink")
[Category:Revolutions](Category:Revolutions.md "wikilink")