---
title: Patriarchy
permalink: /Patriarchy/
---

**Patriarchy** is an ideology and practice that produces what we
commonly recognize as sexism. But it goes well beyond individual or
systemic prejudice against women. It is, first of all, the false
division of all people into two rigid categories (male and female) that
are asserted to be both natural and moral. (Many perfectly healthy
people do not fit into either of these physiological categories, and
many non-Western cultures recognized - and still do, if they haven’t
been destroyed — more than two sexes and genders.) Patriarchy goes on to
define clear roles (economic, social, emotional, political) for men and
women, and it asserts (falsely) that these roles are natural and moral.
Under patriarchy, people who do not fit into or who reject these gender
roles are neutralized with violence and ostracism. They are made to seem
and feel ugly, dirty, scary, contemptible, worthless. Patriarchy is
harmful to everybody, and it is reproduced by everyone who lives within
it. True to its name, it puts men in a dominant position and women in a
submissive position. Activities and characteristics that are
traditionally associated with “power,” or, at least privilege, mostly
belong to men. Patriarchy gives both the ability and the right to use
violence almost exclusively to men.

[Category:Concepts](Category:Concepts.md "wikilink") [Category:Libertarian
Socialist Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink")