---
title: Pilbara Strike (1946)
permalink: /Pilbara_Strike_(1946)/
---

The **Pilbara Strike of 1946**was a [strike](List_of_Strikes "wikilink")
in [Australia](Australia "wikilink") in
[early](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Oceania "wikilink")
[1946](Revolutions_of_1943_-_1949 "wikilink"), led by [indigenous
farmworkers](Timeline_of_Indigenism "wikilink") for indigenous rights
and workers rights.

## Background

was a landmark strike by Indigenous Australian pastoral workers in the
Pilbara region of Western Australia for human rights recognition and
payment of fair wages and working conditions. The strike involved at
least 800 Aboriginal pastoral workers walking off the large Pastoral
Stations in the Pilbara on 1 May 1946, and from employment in the two
major towns of Port Hedland and Marble Bar. The strike did not end until
August 1949 and even then many indigenous Australians refused to go back
and work for white station owners.<sup>\[1\]</sup>

It is regarded as one of the longest industrial strikes in Australia,
and a landmark in indigenous Australians fighting for their human
rights, cultural rights, and Native title.

For many years Aboriginal pastoral workers in the Pilbara were denied
cash wages and were only paid in supplies of tobacco, flour and other
necessities.<sup>\[1\]</sup> The pastoral stations treated the
Aboriginal workers as a cheap slave labour workforce to be exploited. If
they tried to leave the station, they were found and brought back by the
police, according to Don McLeod.

European attacks and brutal shootings of whole family groups of
indigenous Australians are part of the history of the region, though
often not well documented. One attack took place at Skull Creek near
Barrow Creek in the 1870s, which resulted in the bleached bones and thus
the name for the place<sup>\[2\]</sup> There is a well documented report
of a massacre in 1926 by a police party on the Forrest River Mission
(now the Aboriginal community of Oombulgurri), in the East Kimberleys.
Though there was a Royal commission into the reported killing and
burning of Aborigines in East Kimberley, the police allegedly involved
were brought to trial and acquitted.<sup>\[3\]</sup> (see List of
massacres of indigenous Australians).

As well as proper wages and better working conditions, Aboriginal lawmen
sought natural justice arising from the original Western Australian
colonial Constitution. As a condition for self-rule in the colony, the
British Government insisted that once public revenue in WA exceeded
500,000 pounds, 1 per cent was to be dedicated to "the welfare of the
Aboriginal natives" under Section 70 of the
Constitution.<sup>\[4\]</sup> Succeeding colonial and state Governments
legislated to remove the funding provisions for "native welfare".
Aboriginal plaintiffs from Strelley Station finally commenced an action
in the State Supreme Court in 1994,<sup>\[5\]</sup> seeking a
declaration that the 1905 repeal was invalid. In 2001, after protracted
litigation, the High Court held that the 1905 repeal had been legally
effective.<sup>\[6\]</sup>

## The strike

The strike was coordinated and led by Aboriginal lawmen Dooley Bin Bin
and Clancy McKenna; and Don McLeod, an active unionist<sup>\[7\]</sup>
and member of the Communist Party of Australia for a short period.
According to McLeod in his book, *How the West was Lost*, self-published
in 1984, the strike was planned at an Aboriginal law meeting in 1942 at
Skull Springs (east of Nullagine), where a massacre had previously
occurred. The meeting was attended by an estimated 200 senior Aboriginal
law-men representing twenty-three language groups from much of the
remote northwest of Australia. Discussions were protracted with the
meeting lasting six weeks. McLeod was given the task of chief
negotiator. The strike was postponed until after the Second World War
had ended.<sup>\[8\]</sup>

Crude calendars were taken from one station camp to another in early
1946 to organise the strike. The efforts, if noticed by the white people
present, were dismissed and laughed at. When 1 May 1946 occurred
hundreds of Aboriginal workers left the pastoral stations and setup
strike camps.

The strike was most effective in the Pilbara region. Further afield in
Broome and Derby and other inland northern towns, the strike movement
was harshly suppressed by police action and was more short lived. Over
the three years, occasionally strikers went back to work, while others
joined or rejoined the strike.

At the commencement of the strike in 1946, Don McLeod was an Australian
Workers' Union delegate at Port Hedland wharf who motivated support by
the Australian labour movement. The Western Australian branch of the
Seamen's Union of Australia eventually put a blackban on the shipment of
wool from the Pilbara. Nineteen unions in Western Australia, seven
federal unions and four Trades and Labour councils supported the strike.
The strike stimulated support from the Woman's Christian Temperance
Union, who helped establish the Committee for the Defense of Native
Rights. This organisation raised funds for and publicised the strike in
Perth including organising a public meeting in the Perth Town Hall
attended by 300 people.

Many of the Aboriginal strikers served time in jail; some were seized by
police at revolver point and put into chains for several days. At one
stage in December 1946 Don McLeod was arrested in Port Hedland during
the strike for 'inciting Aborigines to leave their place of lawful
employment'; the Aboriginal strikers marched on the jail and McLeod was
freed. McLeod was gaoled a total of seven times during the period, three
times for being within five chains (100 m) of a congregation of natives,
three times for inciting natives to leave their lawful employment, and
once for forgery.

In one incident during the strike, two policemen were sent out to the
Five Mile Camp near Marble Bar. When they arrived they commenced
shooting the people's dogs, even when they were chained up between their
legs. Shooting the dogs of Aborigines was considered by some frontier
Europeans as a sport. On this occasion the endangering of human life
angered the strikers who quickly disarmed the two policeman. The local
strike leader, Jacob Oberdoo, and other strikers held the policemen
until they had regained some composure and then arranged their own
arrests insisting they be taken into custody.

Oberdoo was jailed three or four times and suffered humiliations and
deprivations of many kinds during the strike, but maintained his dignity
and solidarity for the length of the strike. In 1972 he was awarded the
British Empire Medal but turned it down. McLeod described Oberdoo's
reply to the Prime Minister rejecting the medal:


"he was unable to do business with, or accept favours from

Law-carriers in bad standing. "You pin medals on dogs" was how he
explained the real message underlying the award." The strikers were
forced to sustain themselves by their traditional bush skills, hunting
kangaroos and goats for both meat and skins. They also developed some
cottage industry which brought some cash payment such as selling buffel
grass seed in Sydney, the sale of pearl shell, and in surface mining.

Aboriginal women played a vital role in the strike, both as workers on
strike and in the establishment of strikers' camps, though their
involvement has not been documented to the same extent as that of the
men.<sup>\[9\]</sup> One woman activist Daisy Bindi, a woman from the
Nungamurda people, led a walk-off of 96 workers at Roy Hill Station to
join the strike.<sup>\[10\]</sup> Before the strike commenced, Bindi
organised meetings in south-eastern Pilbara, which attracted police
attention, and authorities threatened to remove her from the
area.<sup>\[9\]</sup> During the strike she transported supporters to
the strikers' camps, talking her way through a police confrontation. Her
efforts played a large part in spreading the strike to the further
stations in inland Pilbara.<sup>\[9\]</sup>

Wages and conditions were eventually won by the strikers on Mt. Edgar
and Limestone Stations. These two became a standard, with the strikers
declaring that any station requiring labour would have to equal or
better the rates of pay and conditions operating on these two.

By August 1949, the Seamen's Union had agreed to blackban wool from
stations in the Pilbara onto ships for export. On the third day after
the ban had been applied, McLeod was told by a government representative
that the strikers' demands would be met if the ban was lifted. A week
after the strike ended and the ban was lifted, the government denied
making any such agreement.

After the strike concluded many Aborigines refused to go back to working
in their old roles in the pastoral industry. Eventually they pooled
their funds from surface mining and other cottage industry to buy or
lease stations, including some they had formerly worked on, to run them
as cooperatives.

## Legacy

The poet Dorothy Hewett visited Port Hedland in 1946 and wrote the poem
*Clancey and Dooley and Don McLeod* about the strike,<sup>\[11\]</sup>
which was subsequently put to music by folk musician Chris Kempster and
recorded by Roy Bailey. The 1959 documentary novel *Yandy* by Donald
Stuart deals with the strike.<sup>\[12\]</sup> In 1987 a documentary
film was made about the strike by director David Noakes, titled *How the
West was Lost*.<sup>\[13\]</sup>

*Kangkushot, The Life of Nyamal Lawman Peter Coppin*, by Jolly Read and
Peter Coppin, tells the story of Kangku's life including his leadership
in the strike and after in setting up Yandeyarra station which still
runs today. It was shortlisted for the 1999 Western Australian Premier's
Book Awards.

Yandy, a play written by Jolly Read, commissioned by Black Swan State
Theatre Company, tells the story of the strike and its leaders and
families. It won the 2004 Western Australian Premier's Book Award for
best script and is published in Collection \#6 by the Australian Script
Centre.

Four streets in the Canberra suburb of Bonner were named after the
strike leaders in 2010. Clancy McKenna Crescent, Dooley Bin Bin Street,
Peter Coppin Street and Don McLeod Lane were all named after the men
instrumental in organizing the strike.<sup>\[14\]</sup>