---
title: Polynesian Panther Party
permalink: /Polynesian_Panther_Party/
---

The **Polynesian Panther Party** was a revolutionary movement founded by
[New Zealand](New_Zealand.md "wikilink") born Polynesians on the [16th of
June 1971](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Oceania.md "wikilink").The
party was explicitly influenced (as were many other groups and
[protests](Revolutions_of_1967_-_1975.md "wikilink")) by the US [Black
Panther Party](Black_Panther_Party.md "wikilink"), particularly [Huey
Newton’s](Huey_Newton.md "wikilink") policy of black unity. They located
the causes of [Māori](Māori.md "wikilink") and Pacific Island oppression
within the exploitative social relations of capitalism. Consequently,
the Polynesian Panthers promoted a strategy of liberation based on the
complete overthrow of the capitalist system and the social relations
necessary for its development. The group greatly increased in profile
during an immigration scare campaign in 1975, and the subsequent police
raids.

## Foundation

The Polynesian Panther Movement was founded in inner city Auckland on 16
June 1971 by six young Pacific Islander men: Fred Schmidt, Nooroa
Teavae, Paul Dapp, Vaughan Sanft, Eddie Williams and Will 'Ilolahia. At
the time many Pacific Island youth were supporters of Māori political
initiatives such as the [Bastion Point
occupation](Bastion_Point_Occupation.md "wikilink") and [Waitangi Day
protests](Waitangi_Day_Protests.md "wikilink"), and gained skills in
political lobbying and processes which they used to raise the profile of
Pacific people in New Zealand. Because of the working-class background
of its members the movement concerned itself with issues relating to
unequal pay and unsatisfactory working conditions.

Headquarters were established in Ponsonby and the Polynesian Panthers
began to organise activities, among them were homework centres for
Pacific children, visiting Pacific Islander prisoners as well as
providing transport for their families to visit, running programs
educating Pacific Islanders on their rights as New Zealand citizens and
protesting the eviction of tenants in poor communities by private
security firms. Within a few years the movement had expanded nationally
with chapters in South Auckland, Christchurch and Dunedin, as well as
several chapters in prisons.

## Activism

The Polynesian Panthers protested the controversial "dawn raids", which
were introduced in 1973. The raids involved police storming the homes of
people who had overstayed temporary working visas, typically at dawn.
Though the majority of people overstaying such visas were from the UK,
Australia and South Africa, the dawn raids disproportionately targeted
over-stayers of Pacific Islander heritage. In protest, Polynesian
Panther members would organise "raids" on the homes of prominent
politicians in favour of the policy, surrounding them and chanting with
megaphones. The government's dawn raids ended less than three weeks
after the Panthers began their counter raids.

In 1975, the Panthers also started a task-force known as the Police
Investigation Group Patrol, or PIG Patrol, which was a response to
aggressive policies of the New Zealand police force towards Pacific
Islanders. Policies of the police at the time included frequently
approaching Pacific Islanders and asking to see their passport. Anyone
who did not have their passport on their person could be taken to prison
and held until their passport was provided. Convoys of police vehicles
would frequently approach bars frequently by Pacific Islanders, and were
accused of provoking fights. In response, the PIG Patrol monitored
police convoys and phoned in their locations.

The last major activism undertaken by the Panthers was protesting the
1981 Sprinkbok Tour. Panther member Tigilau Ness was imprisoned for his
role in the protests. Founding panther member Will 'Ilolahia was also
arrested for helping organise the protests, and was facing 10 years in
prison if convicted. Following a two year trial, he was found not
guilty, a verdict that was partially attributed to Desmond Tutu flying
from South Africa specifically to act as a character witness for the
Panthers. After describing the Panthers as liberators and defender of
human rights, and attributing their actions as playing a role in the end
of apartheid, a jury took 1 hour and 10 minutes to find 'Ilolahia not
guilty. As he was leaving the courthouse, 'Ilolahia states that police
threatened him with violence, resulting in him returning to Tonga for
his safety. As most of the Panther's duties at the time were organised
by 'Ilolahia, his departure from New Zealand effectively resulted in the
end of the organisation.

## References

[Wikipedia](Wikipedia.md "wikilink") - [Polynesian
Panthers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polynesian_Panthers)

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink") [Category:New
Zealand](Category:New_Zealand.md "wikilink") [Category:Panther
Movements](Category:Panther_Movements.md "wikilink")
[Category:1970s](Category:1970s.md "wikilink") [Category:20th
Century](Category:20th_Century.md "wikilink")
[Category:Oceania](Category:Oceania.md "wikilink")