---
title: PT Istana
permalink: /PT_Istana/
---

![](PTISTANA.JPG "PTISTANA.JPG") **PT Istana** is a textile
[factory](factory "wikilink") in [North
Jakarta](Republic_of_Indonesia "wikilink") which has been
[occupied](Occupation "wikilink") and [controlled by its
workers](Workers'_Self-Management "wikilink") since 2007.

## Events

Jorge Martin, the International Secretary for Hands Off Venezeula,
offered this account of the factory during his tour of
[Malaysia](Malaysia "wikilink") and Indonesia:<em> </em>

On November 11, 2008, we travelled to PT Istana, a textile factory in
North Jakarta, [Indonesia](Republic_of_Indonesia "wikilink"), to visit
the workers who have occupied it and are running it under workers'
control. They were very interested in learning about the movement of
[factory occupations in Latin
America](Recovered_Factory_Movement "wikilink") in general and in
particular the [experience in
Venezuela](Bolivarian_Revolution "wikilink").

When we arrived at the gates of the factory, we saw banners greeting us
and the gates being guarded by the workers. At the top of the gates the
banners from the different organisations involved in the occupation were
flying high and proud: the PRP (Working Peoples' Association) and the
FSBKU-KASBI (Federation of Karya Utama Union - Congress of Indonesian
Union Alliance), which is a local [federation](Confederation "wikilink")
of [unions](Trade_Unions "wikilink") belonging to KASBI. The
[workers](Working_Class "wikilink") present, overwhelmingly women (many
wearing the traditional [Islamic](Islam "wikilink") headscarf), were
extremely pleased to receive support from an international delegation
and were proud to show us what they had achieved through their struggle.
First of all they offered us a meal, which they had cooked themselves in
a corner of the factory yard and which we ate together in the building
they use as an [assembly hall](Democratic_Assembly "wikilink"). The food
was excellent but the thing that struck us most was the mood of the
workers; they were happy, proud, and lively. It was very different from
the mood you would see in a normal factory.

After eating we were shown around the factory premises. This was once a
large textile factory employing more than 1,000 workers and producing
textiles for big name Western brands (including GAP, Banana Republic,
Victoria's Secrets, Adidas) and exporting to
[Australia](Commonwealth_of_Australia "wikilink"), the
[US](United_States_of_America "wikilink"),
[India](Republic_of_India "wikilink"), [Malaysia](Malaysia "wikilink"),
[Germany](Federal_Republic_of_Germany "wikilink"), etc. The first
section of the factory we visited was where the workers had gathered a
few of the machines and where they had managed to keep production going.
The factory had been affected by flooding, which is recurrent in this
part of Jakarta. However, since the company owners had cut off the
[electricity](electricity "wikilink") supply, the workers had not been
able to use the pump to remove the water. This was a sad sight as
hundreds of machines were lying idle in this massive warehouse with
water knee-high. This is an example of the nature of
[capitalism](capitalism "wikilink"): machines go unused while thousands
of [workers have no jobs](Unemployment "wikilink").

On the first floor we saw another section where there were machines. The
workers told us that once they set up a union and about 100 of them
joined SBKU-KASBI, the bosses decided that they were dangerous and
separated them from the rest of the workers! They were working here on
the first floor, not in contact with the other 300 workers on the ground
floor shop. The visit continued through the trimming area, the design
area (where files were kept with the specifications of well known
brands), the place where fabrics were kept and finally the directors'
plush offices (now also flooded). In one of the offices we could see
boxes of finished products ready to be exported to Germany.

After the visit, a mass meeting started with the presence of the workers
and representatives of organisations of workers,
[students](Student "wikilink"), [alternative
media](Alternative_Media "wikilink"), lawyers and other supporters of
the occupation.

The spokespersons of the Occupied Factory Committee (Kompap) told us
their story. The factory, previously known as CV Melody, was a
successful and profitable textile factory. The problems started when the
workers got organised, set up the SBKU union, and started demanding
their rights. The company resorted to terrorist methods of intimidation
against the union leaders, seizing their ID's, locking them up in a
room, separating union workers from the rest. But none of this broke the
union.

In 2007, the workers were asked to sign voluntary resignation forms,
thus giving up their redundancy payment rights. Many of the workers were
intimidated into signing them, but the 100 or so belonging to the union
steadfastly refused and won their case in an industrial court. Finally,
in July 2007, the company put up posters announcing the end of
production and tried to lock the workers out. The workers fought back
and found themselves [occupying the premises](Occupation "wikilink").
Initially they were just fighting for their redundancy money, but this
quickly escalated into a struggle for their jobs once it became clear
that the company was not prepared to pay. They received support from the
PRP, KASBI, and other organisations.

The first months of the occupation were very hard. The boss used the
security personnel to try to evict the workers by force. Once this
failed, he sent hired thugs. But the 76 women workers and 2 male workers
in the occupation resisted, they explained proudly. "We were all women,
we only had two men, but we sent the thugs away", said Mosul, one of the
Committee leaders.

In January 2008, the company put pressure on the electricity company to
cut off the power supply to the factory. This was a serious blow to the
workers, since they became unable to use the machines, had no light, and
could not pump water out of the premises during the floods. For a while
they had to resort to using kerosene lamps. However, with help from
supporters they managed to get a diesel power generator which now allows
them to run the machines they were able to rescue from the flooded
warehouse. At the same time, they are in negotiations with the union of
the electricity workers (Serikat Pekerja PLN) to try to get reconnected
to the power grid.

The Factory Committee runs on a democratic basis and responds to the
mass assembly of the workers. It was very interesting to see the
accounts of the committee in running the factory published on the board
for all to see and inspect. The shifts the workers had to do in
production and security were also announced on the board. The Kompap,
they told us, is divided into commissions dealing with the legal battle,
propaganda, production, administration, getting orders, education and
development, etc.

During the occupation the workers learned about the movement of occupied
factories in Latin America and watched both [Naomi
Klein's](Naomi_Klein "wikilink") "[The
Take](The_Take_(Film) "wikilink")" about
[Argentina](Argentinazo "wikilink") and HOV's "No Volveran" about
Venezuela. This generated discussions which ended with the decision to
start production under workers' control. They managed to get a contract
from CTM and were looking for other contracts. They proudly showed us
the finished products they were making.

The main thread running through their explanations was how they realised
that the workers are strong, and how this was one of the main
achievements of the occupation. "The workers should have power", said
another of the occupation leaders. The Kompap had made a conscious
effort to record all the aspects of the occupation so that this material
could be used for the education of other workers.

The discussion lasted for more than three hours and many issues were
raised. The workers were keenly interested in learning about the
practical aspects and the difficulties facing the factory occupations in
Venezuela. They were pleasantly surprised to see that the way they had
organised their committee was almost identical to that of workers in
Latin America occupying factories.

We insisted on the importance of the step they had taken, not only in
occupying the factory, but also in starting to produce without
[bosses](Boss "wikilink"). They had proven something very important: the
bosses need the workers to run the factories, but the workers do not
need the bosses! We discussed a lot of the detailed practical problems
they faced and suggested possible solutions. However, we insisted that
one cannot have socialism in one factory and their struggle should be
seen as part of the wider struggle to transform society; something which
they were very aware of.

The meeting ended with a spirited singing of the Internationale with all
the workers standing and raising their fists. It was a moving moment.
You could see in the workers' faces their sense of pride and
achievement. They know that their struggle will not be easy and that
they face many difficulties. However, what they have learnt in these few
months will never be taken away from them.[^1]

## References

<references />

[Category:Workers'
Self-Management](Category:Workers'_Self-Management "wikilink")
[Category:Indonesia](Category:Indonesia "wikilink") [Category:Southeast
Asia](Category:Southeast_Asia "wikilink")
[Category:Asia](Category:Asia "wikilink") [Category:Libertarian
Socialism](Category:Libertarian_Socialism "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink") [Category:Worker
Uprisings](Category:Worker_Uprisings "wikilink")
[Category:2007](Category:2007 "wikilink")
[Category:2000s](Category:2000s "wikilink") [Category:21st
Century](Category:21st_Century "wikilink")

[^1]: <http://www.workerscontrol.net/authors/indonesia-pt-istana-factory-occupied-and-producing-under-workers%E2%80%99-control>