---
title: Qidong Pipeline Campaign (2012)
permalink: /Qidong_Pipeline_Campaign_(2012)/
---

The **Qidong Pipeline Campaign of 2012** was a grassroots [environmental
protest](Timeline_of_Environmentalism "wikilink") that started in the
city of Qidong, Jiangsu, [China](China "wikilink") on the 28th of July,
[2012](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Eastern_Asia "wikilink").

## Background

The coastal city of Qidong is located at the mouth of the Yangtze River,
approximately one hour north of Shanghai. The city's economy is centered
largely on the fishing industry, and is a major source of lobster and
shrimp exports. In 2007, the [Japan](Japan "wikilink")-based Oji Paper
Company began construction of a paper mill in the city of Nantong,
Jiangsu, located approximately 100Â km inland from the coast. A
wastewater pipeline was designed to carry approximately 150,000 tons of
waste water per day from Nantong to the coast off Qidong. Although
representatives of the paper company gave assurances that the water
would be purified to meet environmental standards, Qidong residents
feared the discharge would pollute water supplies, adversely affecting
the fishing industry and drinking water. Some residents further claimed
that they were not properly consulted about the project.

## Events

On 28 July, roughly 10,000 Qidong residents took to the streets to
demand the suspension of the pipeline project. An estimated 1,000
protesters stormed government buildings, where they were reportedly seen
"smashing computers, overturning desks and throwing documents out of the
windows to loud cheers from the crowd," according to *The Guardian.*
Information circulated on the popular microblogging site Sina Weibo said
that the protesters discovered condoms and expensive liquor in
government offices. The city's mayor, Sun Jianhua, was stripped of his
shirt and then made to wear an opposition T-shirt. At least five cars
were overturned, and protesters clashed violently with police. A
reporter with Asahi Shimbun was reportedly beaten by security forces
while taking photographs of protesters "under attack by police."

Additionally, according to the Google Translated version from Chinese
Wikipedia: "Citizens who entered the city government office building
were very excited after searching out a large number of travel photos,
travel hats, famous cigarettes, condoms, etc. At the scene, there was a
scold. The wine was poured all over the place, and the fragrance of the
wine lasted for a long time." The editors of
[libsocwiki](Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink") are unable to
determine the meaning of this.

## Results

As a result of the protest, the Qidong Pipeline construction was
canceled.

The Qidong Protest had the effect of inflaming anti-Japanese sentiment
in China. The Wall Street Journal reported on nationalist comments
posted on China's Weibo blogging site: "How can a Japanese paper factory
come and damage Chinese people's health and our environment? How can we
with our 1.3-billion population be afraid of that little Japan?," wrote
one user from Guangdong province. Other called for a boycott of Japanese
products.

## See Also

- [Chinese Protest Wave (2007 -
  2014)](Chinese_Protest_Wave_(2007_-_2014) "wikilink")
- [Shifang Anti-Factory
  Campaign](Shifang_Anti-Factory_Campaign_(2012) "wikilink")
- [Ningbo Anti-Refinery
  Campaign](Ningbo_Anti-Refinery_Campaign_(2012) "wikilink")

## References

[Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") (Chinese) - [Qidong
protest](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Qidong_protest)

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:China](Category:China "wikilink")
[Category:Asia](Category:Asia "wikilink") [Category:Eastern
Asia](Category:Eastern_Asia "wikilink")
[Category:2012](Category:2012 "wikilink")
[Category:2010s](Category:2010s "wikilink") [Category:21st
Century](Category:21st_Century "wikilink") [Category:Social
Movements](Category:Social_Movements "wikilink")
[Category:Environmentalism](Category:Environmentalism "wikilink")