---
title: Rojava
permalink: /Rojava/
---

The **Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria (NES)** or
commonly known as **Rojava**(sometimes called **Kurdistan** by western
[media](Mass_Media "wikilink")) is an ongoing effort since
[2012](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism "wikilink") to create a
[libertarian socialist](Libertarian_Socialism "wikilink")
[society](List_of_Libertarian_Socialist_Societies "wikilink") in the
north of [Syria](Syrian_Arab_Republic "wikilink") according to the
principles of [Democratic
Confederalism](Democratic_Confederalism "wikilink"). This began with the
[Rojava Revolution](Rojava_Revolution "wikilink"), Rojava is currently
battling an apocalyptic war with Turkey.

## Decision-Making

Decisions are made by community assemblies and a unique four-level model
of a [confederation](Confederations "wikilink"). These are divided into
four main levels of decision-making.

- **Commune:** Between 30 and 400 households gather in local assemblies
  to discuss, debate and vote on how to solve the issues affecting them
  the most.
- **Neighbourhood** or **Village People's Council**: Delegates from 7-30
  communes gather to coordinate efforts between communes and solve
  larger-scale issues in either rural or urban contexts.
- **District People's Council**: Delegates from neighbouring people's
  councils gather to discuss issues affecting the city and surrounding
  land and villages. There are political parties, civil societies and
  social movements at this level which advocate for various political
  perspectives.
- **People's Council of Western Kurdistan**: The highest level of
  decision-making that affects region-wide issues. This is made up of
  delegates from all district people's councils. By law, 40% of
  delegates must be women.

Each council can create 'commissions' made up of various specialists and
experts which perform tasks for the communities whilst still be highly
accountable to them in a democratic fashion.[^1]

## Crime

A new criminal justice approach was implemented that emphasizes
restoration over retribution. The death penalty was abolished. Prisons
house mostly people charged with terrorist activity related to ISIL and
other extremist groups. A September 2015 report of Amnesty International
noted that 400 people were incarcerated of a population of 4.6 million,
or 8.7 people per 100,000, compared to 60.0 people per 100,000 in Syria
as a whole, and the second lowest rate in the world after San Marino.
However, the report also noted some deficiencies in due process.

## Economy

As of 2015, around 75% of land within the NES is owned in
[common](Commons "wikilink") and 33% of industry is run according to the
principles of [workers'
self-management](Workers'_Self-Management "wikilink").[^2] The economy
is divided into three major sectors:

1.  The Social Economy, composed of worker cooperatives.
2.  The War Economy, composed of commune efforts to finance the military
    and public services.
3.  The Open Economy, an incomplete attempt to encourage foreign
    investment and support.[^3]

Industry includes 50 soap factories, 20 olive oil factories, 250 olive
processing plants, 70 factories making construction materials, 400
textile workshops, 8 shoe factories, 5 factories producing nylon and 15
factories processing marble in the canton. Two mills, two hotels and a
dam have recently been built and a new 84,000 square meter industrial
park has been opened which is home to at least 800 workplaces.[^4]

## Public Services

Following the [Rojava Revolution](Rojava_Revolution "wikilink"),
hundreds of schools for people of all ages have been established. Many
such schools focus on teaching the languages spoken by ethnic minorities
(previously punishable by torture) and uncovering much of the wisdom
hidden within the history of Western Asia. The schools borrow elements
from [democratic schooling](Democratic_Education "wikilink"), being
compared to [John Dewey's](John_Dewey "wikilink") vision of an ideal
education.[^5] In 2014, the first [university](university "wikilink")
(Mesopotamian Social Sciences Academy) was opened in Qamişlo in the
Cizîrê Canton. It offered students classes, a library,
[internet](internet "wikilink") access, sports facilities and a
dormitory.[^6]

Councils and communes have also pooled together to provide citizens with
clean energy, food sovereignty, waste management, water security[^7],
internet access[^8] and cultural festivals.[^9]

## Environmental Protection

![](RojavaEcology.JPG "RojavaEcology.JPG") In 2018, many local
communities agreed to the campaign titled '[Make Rojava Green
Again](Make_Rojava_Green_Again "wikilink")' which aims to restore the
region to its natural ecological health. Measures taken include the
construction of areas for solar and wind
[electricity](electricity "wikilink") generation. The construction of
urban and rooftop agriculture within cities. The creation of large
wildlife reserves and reforestation campaigns. Water and material
recycling, compost in agriculture as well as safe and clean waste
management. The campaign is done on the advice of specialist advisors
with backgrounds in physics, chemistry, biology, systems theory and
ecology.[^10]

## Culture

Parts of the NES have seen an explosion in the development of art,
including a rise in music, film and theater productions.[^11]

Biman Khalaf, 25, born to a Kurdish father and an Arab mother, told
Al-Monitor, “I started singing at the age of 12 and joined Kurdish
folkloric bands in our region. Despite our community’s negative
perception of a young girl who goes out alone and sings on popular
stages and during national celebrations, my neighbors and cousins had a
different view. I have also had to deal with other challenges, which
came in the form of security pursuits by the regime, as Kurds were
banned from celebrating their folklore.”

“After the revolution started, … I was given more freedom. My mother’s
family especially showed great support and my siblings now encourage me
more than ever. I feel that we can finally spread our wings, especially
after the regime forces left our regions in northern and northwestern
Syria, which are now part of Rojava,” Khalaf said.

Kurds are no strangers to revolutionary art, which has played important
roles during the many Kurdish revolutions such as the one led by Mustafa
Barzani (the father of KRG President Massoud Barzani) in Iraq in 1958.
The Kurdish revolutionary artistic scene boasts figures such as singer
Sivan Perwer, whose songs supported the Kurdish revolution in Turkey in
1984. When the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) was founded, revolutionary
art reached its zenith with the rise of the Kurdish resistance band Koma
Berxwedan, which was widely popular among Kurds split among Iraq,
Iran and Syria.

After that, the artistic scene saw the rise of Kurdish bands formed by
PKK fighters in the mountainous region. Awaze Ciya is one of them. All
of its members are fighters who sing for the revolution.

Salman Ibrahim, a co-director of Rojava's Center of Art and Democratic
Culture in al-Jazeera canton, told Al-Monitor, “Under the rule of the
Assad regime, we worked privately among the people, as Kurds faced
pressure and crackdowns by the regime. We weren’t allowed to exhibit our
talents, especially if they carry anti-regime messages. We would sing
and celebrate the revolution in private and in places away from the eyes
of regime informants. Popular and folkloric songs helped us to preserve
our spoken language, which the regime forbade us from using.”

He said, “Examples of Kurdish fighters who hold a weapon in one hand and
a musical instrument in the other can also be found in the Kurdistan
mountains, where PKK members opposed to the Turkish state live. As a
result, musical bands were formed to celebrate the revolution. Many
revolutionary artists died in battle like Shahit Sarhad, who became the
singer of the revolution.”

Ibrahim added, “Five years into the Syrian revolution, artists now have
the support of the Kurdish administration in Rojava, the safest area in
Syria. The amount of freedom we have allowed us to express ourselves and
our solidarity with our Kurdish fighters, especially the women, who are
now considered the face of the revolution.”

Revolutionary art has also been revived in Rojava with the formation
of popular theaters in many cities and villages. They celebrate
the Kurdish folklore that was banned in Syria as well as in parts of
Kurdistan.

Despite losing his sight due to an illness, musician Nouri Kazem plays
the tanbur, a Kurdish folkloric instrument. He told Al-Monitor, “I
started performing at a young age in weddings. Now I make a living out
of music, which also comforts me. The revolution had a significant
impact on us. As an artist, I have always been a supporter of the
revolution in Rojava through my music, defending the Kurdish dream of
living peacefully in our country, Syria, where we weren’t allowed to
speak to each other in our native tongue during the regime’s era.”

Art has always played a significant role in the Kurds' lives. They sing
Kurdish epics and songs in celebration of heroic deeds by the many
leaders who fought during Kurdish revolutions, such as Ihsan Nuri, the
leader of the Agri revolution in Turkey in 1925, and many others who
died fighting for freedom like Mashaal Tammo, a leading Kurdish
opposition figure in the Syrian revolution.

International media and local journalists operate with few restrictions
in the region, one of the only regions in Syria where they can operate
according to the principles of freedom of the press.[^12]

## See Also

- [Criticism of Rojava](Criticism_of_Rojava "wikilink")

## References

<references />

[Category:Societies](Category:Societies "wikilink")
[Category:Syria](Category:Syria "wikilink") [Category:Libertarian
Socialism](Category:Libertarian_Socialism "wikilink")
[Category:Communalism](Category:Communalism "wikilink")
[Category:Democratic
Confederalism](Category:Democratic_Confederalism "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Societies](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Societies "wikilink")
[Category:Western Asia](Category:Western_Asia "wikilink")
[Category:Asia](Category:Asia "wikilink") [Category:Current Libertarian
Socialist
Societies](Category:Current_Libertarian_Socialist_Societies "wikilink")
[Category:2012](Category:2012 "wikilink")
[Category:2010s](Category:2010s "wikilink") [Category:21st
Century](Category:21st_Century "wikilink")

[^1]: Ercan Ayboga (2013) Revolution in Rojava

[^2]: Strangers in a Tangled Wilderness (2015) A Small Key Can Open A
    Large Door: The Rojava Revolution

[^3]: <http://www.biehlonbookchin.com/rojavas-threefold-economy/>

[^4]: <https://mesopotamia.coop/the-economy-of-rojava/>

[^5]: [Janet Biehl](Janet_Biehl "wikilink") (2015) Revolutionary
    Education in Rojava -
    <http://new-compass.net/articles/revolutionary-education-rojava>

[^6]: First New University To Open In Rojava (2014)
    <https://rojavareport.wordpress.com/2014/08/31/first-new-university-to-open-in-rojava/>

[^7]:

[^8]: <http://syriannewscenter.net/ar/article/23775-%D8%A7%D9%86%D8%AA%D8%B1%D9%86%D8%AA-%D9%81%D9%8A-%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%AD%D8%B3%D9%83%D8%A9-%D9%88%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%82%D8%A7%D9%85%D8%B4%D9%84%D9%8A-%D8%AE%D9%84%D8%A7%D9%84-10-%D8%A3%D9%8A%D8%A7%D9%85.html>

[^9]: <http://www.kurdistan24.net/en/news/3cfd84f7-b2fb-4370-a8b0-67fcfadbb58f/Syrian-Kurds-hold-theatre-festival-in-Rojava-amid-war>

[^10]: Andrew Neef (2018) Building Ecology through Autonomy in Rojava -
    <https://unicornriot.ninja/2018/building-autonomy-ecology-rojava/>

[^11]: <https://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2016/07/syria-kurdish-rojava-revolutionary-art.html>

[^12]: Freedom of the Press - Syria (2015)
    <https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-press/2015/syria>