---
title: Sabuk Uprising (1980)
permalink: /Sabuk_Uprising_(1980)/
---

The **Sabuk Uprising of 1980** was a
[strike](List_of_Strikes.md "wikilink") turned
[uprising](List_of_Revolutions.md "wikilink") in [South
Korea](South_Korea.md "wikilink") in
[1980](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Eastern_Asia.md "wikilink")
that was almost successful until betrayed by the government, [part of a
global wave of democratic unrest at the
time](Revolutions_of_1979_-_1985.md "wikilink"). It also happened a few
weeks before the much more famous uprising in the city of
[Kwangju](Gwangju_Uprising_(1980).md "wikilink").

## Background

The coal-mining town of Sabuk (which produced 11% of South Korea's coal
in 1980) in South Korea was brutally poor, low wages, poor working
conditions for miners and poor living standards (many houses did not
have warm water) and high prices for food at company stores meant that
people were angry. The local trade union did not do anything to increase
workers rights, until the national miners union pushed for a 42%
increase in wages, the coal miners offered to increase wages by 20%, but
workers in Sabuk were not happy.

Angered by the economic conditions and lack of democracy in the unions
and South Korea as a whole (then a military dictatorship) the workers
demanding a meeting with the bosses. When they refused to show, they
occupied the office and were soon attacked by the police who were armed
with rifles. Protesters fought back and pushed them out of the town,
stealing weapons from the police station and explosives from the mine.
The town was completely independent for free days, as the government
agreed not to punish the striking workers and a 42% wage increase in
exchange for the workers surrendering their weapons.

## Results

After the workers gave up their weapons, the government instantly
betrayed them and did not live up to their demands, torturing many of
the key activists.

## References

(Source is in Korean language) -
<http://hadream.com/xe/history/42507?ckattempt=3>

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink") [Category:South
Korea](Category:South_Korea.md "wikilink")
[Category:Asia](Category:Asia.md "wikilink") [Category:Eastern
Asia](Category:Eastern_Asia.md "wikilink")
[Category:1980](Category:1980.md "wikilink")
[Category:1980s](Category:1980s.md "wikilink") [Category:20th
Century](Category:20th_Century.md "wikilink")
[Category:Strikes](Category:Strikes.md "wikilink")
[Category:Uprisings](Category:Uprisings.md "wikilink") [Category:Worker
Uprisings](Category:Worker_Uprisings.md "wikilink")