---
title: Shenzhen Golf Factory Strike (2014)
permalink: /Shenzhen_Golf_Factory_Strike_(2014)/
---

The **Chinese Golf Factory Strike of 2014** or the **Chinese Golf
Factory Workers Strike for Essential Rights**was a
[strike](List_of_Strikes "wikilink") of [golf](golf "wikilink")
[factory](factory "wikilink") workers in Shenzhen, Southern
[China](China "wikilink") in
[2014](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Eastern_Asia "wikilink").

## Background

The **Chinese Golf Factory Workers Strike for Essential Rights** was a
strike that happened in Shenzhen, China. On July 21, 2014, approximately
300 Chinese workers at China Qilitian Golf Articles (QLT), in Shenzhen,
China, marched in a strike to obtain their essential rights as factory
workers. One of the prominent leaders of the strike was Qi Jianguang, a
26-year-old man who worked at the factory for eight years. During the
strike, the workers marched throughout a park in Shenzhen as they
carried banners, and also took photos on their devices that were later
posted on social media. They used social media in a beneficial way, to
promote their campaign, and to create worldwide awareness of this event.

## Background

The workers for QLT produce golf balls and golf clubs for Nike,
Callaway, Bridgestone, Ping, Cobra, and Titleist. The factory employed
over 2,000 workers at the time of the strike, yet was proven to be
disobeying the Chinese law for years. QLT failed to purchase five types
of insurance that were required by law. In addition, the company
deducted excessive tax on employees’ paychecks. Not only that, but China
Qilitian Golf Articles also neglected to make social security
contributions for its large number of employees, and deprived the
workers of their basic rights. Some of these basic rights included,
“payment for social insurance, funding for housing, high temperature
subsidies, living wages during low production season, and also factory
union elections,” (Global Nonviolent Action Database, Molly Murphy,
2015).

China Qilitian Golf Articles created another production line in
Jianguanxi, China, in order to obtain a greater amount of inexpensive
labour. Due to the creation of an additional location, the company began
to reduce orders and relocate assets from the Shenzhen factory. The
workers at the Shenzhen location were extremely worried that their
workplace would close in the near future, and therefore decided to go on
strike.

## Outcome

`   The `

strike had an immensely negative impact on QLT, which in turn, led the
management team to negotiate with its employees. The strikers created a
list of demands that they were determined to have met, and the
organization approved the majority of the workers’ demands. The
management team of QLT arranged monthly meetings to be held with workers
who were democratically elected to the workers’ committee. The purpose
of these meetings was to resolve any further complications after the
strike, and to promote compromise amongst the management team and its
employees. Other factory workers across China were inspired by the
success of the nonviolent demonstrations, and many workers decided to
also protect their essential rights. As a result, there was a distinct
increase in the number of labour protests that occurred throughout
China.

## Results