---
title: Shifang Anti-Factory Campaign (2012)
permalink: /Shifang_Anti-Factory_Campaign_(2012)/
---

The **Shifang Anti-Factory Campaign of 2012** was a grassroots
[environmentalist movement](Timeline_of_Environmentalism "wikilink") led
by high school [students](Student "wikilink") in
[2012](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Eastern_Asia "wikilink") in
the city of Shifang, Sichuan, [China](China "wikilink").

## Background

On the 29th of June, 2012, the government of the city of Shifang
announced the construction of a molybdenum-copper alloy factory. High
school students in the area who were concerned about the factory’s
environmental impacts sent the government a petition calling for it to
cancel the construction. Reports estimated that the factory would
pollute a radius of 60 km, encompassing Chengdu, the capital of Sichuan
Province. The students also distributed pamphlets and posters over the
entire city to raise awareness and rally the residents to take action
against the refinery’s construction. High schools threatened to expel
the student activists if they continued their protests.

## Events

Later that day, thousands gathered in the Shifang public square and in
front of government buildings in protest. On the 2nd of July hundreds of
protestors began a sit-in at the gate of the Shifang Municipal
Government Compound and signed names on a banner. The government sent in
riot police who used tear gas, stun grenades, batons and live ammunition
at the protesters. Many protestors and witnesses posted personal
accounts, videos, and pictures on Weibo, a Chinese social networking
site. One user said that the government had bribed people living near
the plant with 20,000 yuan (equivalent to US \$2,800 in 2012) in hush
money. Another Weibo user posted about a restaurant owner who had
refused to serve a police officer in protest against the police
violence. On the 3rd of July police attacked protesters with tear gas
and grenades and arrested 28 people, a number of them students.

## Results

By the end of the night, the government had given in to the protesters’
demands and announced that they would terminate the project. The police
released 22 detainees later that night. However, they formally arrested
three people on criminal charges and another three on administrative
charges.

## References

[Global Nonviolent Action
Database](Global_Nonviolent_Action_Database "wikilink") - [Shifang
students prevent copper plant construction, China,
2012](https://nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu/content/shifang-students-prevent-copper-plant-construction-china-2012)