---
title: Shirley Brifman
permalink: /Shirley_Brifman/
---

**Shirley Margaret Brifman** was a sex worker and brothel madam nased in
Brisbane, Queensland, [Australia](Australia.md "wikilink") who was known as
a whistleblower on [police corruption](Police_Corruption.md "wikilink").
She died at the age of 36 in suspicious circumstances, in what was ruled
a suicide, although some have suspected a
[conspiracy](Conspiracy_Theory.md "wikilink").

## Life

She was born in Atherton, Queensland, the daughter of Beatrice (née
Currey) and James Emerson. She began working as a barmaid after leaving
school, and in 1957, she married Szama "Sonny" Brifman, a
[Polish](Poland.md "wikilink")-born hotel owner; they would have four
children together. Her career in prostitution had begun by at least the
following year, when she was known to be working in a Brisbane brothel,
under the alias "Marge Chapple".

She moved to Sydney in 1963. She worked out of a hotel in the Kings
Cross (famous for [something
else](Kings_Cross_Green_Ban.md "wikilink")) red-light district until 1968,
when she began opening her own brothels. She ran establishments in Potts
Point and Elizabeth Bay, and claimed to be making up to \$5,000 per
week. Brifman operated under police protection, but in 1971 she and her
husband were arrested and charged with prostitution offences.

She later appeared on *This Day Tonight*, a national television program,
to make allegations of police corruption, and over the following months
was interviewed by senior officers from both the New South Wales
Police and Queensland Police. She named over fifty police figures (from
both states) who had been involved in prostitution, but criminal charges
were brought against only one officer – detective senior sergeant Tony
Murphy was charged with perjury.

## Death

She died at a police safe house in Clayfield in March 1972, aged 36. Her
death came eighteen days before she was due to appear as chief witness
in the trial of Tony Murphy; the case against him subsequently
collapsed. The police gave her cause of death as "barbiturate
intoxication", and the State Coroner declined to investigate further, as
police advised there were "no suspicious circumstances". Her family
believed she had been murdered, and her husband ensured that her body
was buried rather than cremated in case an exhumation was required.
Allegations of murder were raised at the Fitzgerald Inquiry in the late
1980s, but no action was taken. However, Brifman's daughter Mary Anne
continued to lobby the Queensland government for a further
investigation, and in January 2017 the Attorney-General, Yvette D'Ath,
announced that the State Coroner would "make further inquiries" into her
death and "determine whether an inquest should be held".

## See Also

- [Shirley Finn](Shirley_Finn.md "wikilink")
- [Juanita Nielsen](Juanita_Nielsen.md "wikilink")

## References

[Wikipedia](Wikipedia.md "wikilink") -
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shirley_Brifman>

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink")
[Category:Australia](Category:Australia.md "wikilink")
[Category:Oceania](Category:Oceania.md "wikilink")
[Category:1972](Category:1972.md "wikilink")
[Category:1970s](Category:1970s.md "wikilink") [Category:20th
Century](Category:20th_Century.md "wikilink") [Category:Conspiracy
Theories](Category:Conspiracy_Theories.md "wikilink")