---
title: Shirley Finn
permalink: /Shirley_Finn/
---

**Shirley June Finn**was a Perth brothel keeper, nightclub operator and
well-connected businesswoman and socialite, was shot dead at about
midnight on 22â€“23 June 1975 by an unknown assailant, spawning a popular
[conspiracy theory](Conspiracy_Theory "wikilink") that she was killed by
corrupt [police](police "wikilink").

## Life

Born to a bomber pilot during [World War II](World_War_II "wikilink"),
she lived a comfortable middle class life in the suburb of Mt Pleasant
in [Perth](Australia "wikilink"). Though successful at her schoolwork,
she was sexually active by age 14, which caused her to be committed for
eight months to a notoriously cruel Catholic Church welfare home. She
ran away at 15 and worked in a woman's fashion shop, marrying a 22
year-old air force mechanic and moved to Melborune where she continued
to work in retail.

She moved back to Perth and after having children and her husband became
disabled due to a serious injury she began to work as a stripper,
body-painter and eventually a [sex worker](Sex_Work "wikilink"). She
also joined a group of witches who conducted "black magic and sex"
activities in King's Park at night. Her kids were expelled from school
because of this and her business was raided by police. She later became
associated with [organised crime](Organised_Crime "wikilink") figures
from Kings Cross, Sydney (famous for [something
else](Kings_Cross_Green_Ban "wikilink")) and operated a new business in
1969 with protection from corrupt police who protected her business.

In June 1975, her body was found in a parked car by a passing police
officer at 8:30am outside a golf club, she was slumped behind the wheel
and had been shot four times in the head at close range. She wore
valuable diamond jewellery which had not been touched.[^1]

## Murder Theories

### Theory \#1: Corrupt Police

Given that her death came two days before a tax hearing at which she had
threatened to expose the corruption of police, politicians and business
identities. It is natural to assume she was killed to keep her
quiet.[^2] Police had access to guns and the ability to cover up
investigations and several witnesses have said she was seen with Bernie
Johnson, a former detective who multiple people claimed confessed to the
murder.[^3]

## See Also

- [Shirley Brifman](Shirley_Brifman "wikilink")
- [Juanita Nielsen](Juanita_Nielsen "wikilink")
- [Perth Mint Swindle](Perth_Mint_Swindle "wikilink")

## References

<references />

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Conspiracy Theories](Category:Conspiracy_Theories "wikilink")
[Category:Sex Workers](Category:Sex_Workers "wikilink")
[Category:Australia](Category:Australia "wikilink")
[Category:Oceania](Category:Oceania "wikilink")
[Category:1975](Category:1975 "wikilink")
[Category:1970s](Category:1970s "wikilink") [Category:20th
Century](Category:20th_Century "wikilink") [Category:Police
Corruption](Category:Police_Corruption "wikilink") [Category:Organised
Crime](Category:Organised_Crime "wikilink")

[^1]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") -
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shirley_Finn>

[^2]: <https://www.abc.net.au/news/2019-10-07/the-shirley-finn-murder-mystery/11377440>

[^3]: [Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") -
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shirley_Finn#Witnesses>