---
title: Some Inadequate Explanations (The Irrational in Politics)
permalink: /Some_Inadequate_Explanations_(The_Irrational_in_Politics)/
---

Confronted with disturbing facts like mass popular support for
[imperialist wars](Imperialist_War "wikilink") or the rise of
[fascism](fascism "wikilink") a certain type of traditional
revolutionary can be guaranteed to provide a stereotyped answer. He will
automatically stress the "betrayal" or "inadequacy" of the
[Second](Second_International "wikilink") or [Third
Internationals](Third_International "wikilink"), or of the [German
Communist Party](Communist_Party_of_Germany "wikilink") ... or of this
or that leadership which, for some reason or another, failed to rise to
the historical occasion. (People who argue this way don't even seem to
appreciate that the repeated *tolerance* by the masses of such
"betrayals" or "inadequacies" itself warrants a serious explanation.)

Most sophisticated revolutionaries will lay the blame elsewhere. The
means of moulding public opinion ([press, radio,
TV](Mass_Media "wikilink"), [churches](Organised_Religion "wikilink"),
[schools](Prussian_Education "wikilink") and
[universities](University "wikilink")) are in the hands of the ruling
class. These media consequently disseminate ruling-class ideas, values
and priorities - day in, day out. What is disseminated affects all
layers of the population, contaminating everyone. Is it surprising,
these revolutionaries will ask with a withering smile, that under such
circumstances the mass of people still retain reactionary ideas?[^1]

This explanation, although partially correct, is insufficient. In the
long run it will not explain the continued acceptance by the [working
class](Working_Class "wikilink") of bourgeois rule - or that such rule
has only been overthrown to be replaced by institutions of state
capitalist type, embodying fundamentally similar hierarchical
relationships (cult of leader, total delegation of authority to an
"elite" Party, worship of revealed truth to be found in sacred texts or
in the edicts of the Central Committee). If - both East and West -
millions of people cannot face up to \[the\] implications of their
exploitation, if they cannot perceive their enforced intellectual and
personal underdevelopment, if they are unaware of the intrinsically
repressive character of so much that they consider "rational",
"commonsense", "obvious", or "natural" (hierarchy, inequality and the
puritan ethos, for instance), if they are afraid of initiative and of
self-activity, afraid of thinking new thoughts and of treading new
paths, and if they are ever ready to follow this leader or that
(promising them the moon), or this Party or that (undertaking to change
the world "on their behalf"), it is because there are powerful factors
conditioning their behaviour *from a very early age* and inhibiting
their accession to a different kind of consciousness.

Let us consider for a moment - and not through rose-tinted spectacles -
the average middle-aged working-class voter today (it matters little in
this respect whether he votes "Conservative" or
"[Labour](Labour_Party_(UK) "wikilink")"). He is probably
hierarchy-conscious, xenophobic, racially-prejudiced, pro-monarchy,
pro-capital-punishment, pro-law-and-order, anti-demonstrator,
anti-longhaired students and anti-dropout. He is almost certainly
sexually repressed (and hence an avid, if vicarious, consumer of the
distorted sexuality endlessly depicted in the pages of the *News of the
World*). No "practical" Party (aiming at power through the ballot-box)
would ever dream of appealing to him through the advocacy of wage
equality, [workers' management of
production](Workers'_Self-Management "wikilink"), racial integration,
penal reform, abolition of the monarchy, dissolution of the police,
sexual freedom for adolescents or the legalization of pot. Anyone
proclaiming this kind of "transitional programme" would not only fail to
get support but would probably be considered some kind of a nut.

But there is an even more important fact. Anyone trying to discuss
matters of this kind will almost certainly meet not only with disbelief
but also that positive hostility that often denotes latent anxiety.[^2]
One doesn't meet this kind of response if one argues various meaningless
or downright ludicrous propositions. Certain subjects are clearly
emotionally loaded. Discussing them generates peculiar resistances that
are hardly amenable to rational argument.

It is the purpose of this pamphlet to explore the nature and cause of
these resistances and to point out that they are not innate but socially
determined. (If they were innate, there would be no rational or
socialist perspective whatsoever.) We will be led to conclude that these
resistances are the result of a long-standing conditioning, going back
to earliest childhood, and that this conditioning is mediated through
the whole institution of the [patriarchal](Patriarchy "wikilink")
family. The net result is a powerful reinforcement and perpetuation of
the dominant ideology and the mass production of individuals with
slavery built into them, individuals ready at a later stage to accept
the authority of schoolteacher, priest, employer and politician (and to
endorse the prevailing pattern of "rationality"). Understanding this
collective character structure gives one new insight into the frequently
"irrational" behaviour of individuals or social groups and into the
"irrational in politics". It might also provide mankind with new means
of transcending these obstacles.

## Notes

<references />

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink") [Category:The
Irrational in Politics](Category:The_Irrational_in_Politics "wikilink")

[^1]: To accept this as an "explanation" would be to vest in ideas a
    power they cannot have, namely the power totally to dominate
    material conditions, neutralizing the influence of the economic
    facts of life. It is surprising that this should never have occurred
    to our "[Marxists](Marxism "wikilink")".

[^2]: In the words of Thomas Mann in *Buddenbrooks*: "We are most likely
    to get angry and excited in our opposition to some idea when we
    ourselves are not quite certain of our position, and are inwardly
    tempted to take the other side".