---
title: Some examples (The Irrational in Politics)
permalink: /Some_examples_(The_Irrational_in_Politics)/
---

**Some examples** is the first chapter of [Chris
Pallis'](Chris_Pallis "wikilink") 1970
[book](List_of_Libertarian_Socialist_Books "wikilink") [The Irrational
in Politics](The_Irrational_in_Politics_(Book) "wikilink"), it is
preceded by the
[introduction](Introduction_(The_Irrational_in_Politics) "wikilink") and
followed by the second chapter '[Some Inadequate
Explanations](Some_Inadequate_Explanations_(The_Irrational_in_Politics) "wikilink")'.

## Some examples

For anyone interested in politics the "irrational" behaviour of
individuals, groups or large sections of the population looms as an
unpleasant, frightening, but incontrovertible fact. Here are a few
examples.

Between [1914 and 1918](World_War_I "wikilink") millions of working
people slaughtered one another in the "war to end wars". They died for
ends which were not theirs, defending the interests of their respective
rulers. Those who had nothing rallied to their respective flags and
butchered one another in the name of "Kaiser" or "King and Country".
Twenty years later the process [was repeated](World_War_II "wikilink"),
on an even vaster scale.

In the early 1930s [the economic crisis](Great_Depression "wikilink")
hit [Germany](Germany "wikilink"). Hundreds of thousands [were out of
work](Unemployment "wikilink") and many were
[hungry](Hunger "wikilink"). Bourgeois society revealed its utter
incapacity even to provide the elementary material needs of men. The
time was ripe for radical change. Yet at this critical juncture millions
of men and women (including very substantial sections of the German
[working class](Working_Class "wikilink")) preferred to follow the
crudely nationalistic, self-contradictory (anti-capitalist and
anti-communist) exhortations of a [reactionary
demagogue](Adolf_Hitler "wikilink"), preaching a
[mixture](Nazism "wikilink") of racial hatred, puritanism and
ethnological nonsense, rather than embark on the unknown road of [social
revolution](Social_Revolution "wikilink").[^1]

In [New Delhi](India "wikilink") in 1966 hundreds of thousands of
half-starving Indian peasants and urban poor actively participated in
the biggest and most militant demonstration the town had ever known.
Whole sections of the city were occupied, policemen attacked, cars and
buses burnt. The object of this massive action was not, however, to
protest against the social system which maintained the vast mass of the
people in a state of permanent poverty and made a mockery of their
lives. It was to denounce some contemplated legislation permitting cow
slaughter under specific circumstances. Indian "revolutionaries"
meanwhile were in no position to make meaningful comment. Did they not
still allow their parents to fix their marriages for them and
considerations of caste repeatedly to colour their politics?

In Britain several million working people, disappointed with the record
of the present Labour Government, with its wage freeze and attempted
assault on the unions, will vote Conservative within the next few weeks.
As they did in 1930. And in 1950-51. Or, to the unheard tune of
encouragement from self-styled revolutionaries, they will vote Labour,
expecting (or not) that things will be "different next time".

At a more mundane level the behaviour of consumers today is no more
"rational" than that of voters or of the oppressed classes in history.
Those who understand the roots of popular preference know how easily
demand can be manipulated. [Advertizing](Advertising "wikilink") experts
are fully aware that rational choice has little to do with consumer
preferences. When a housewife is asked why she prefers one product to
another the reasons she gives are seldom the real ones (even if she is
answering in total good faith).

Largely unconscious motives even influence the ideas of revolutionaries
and the type of organization in which they choose to be active. At first
sight it might appear paradoxical that those aspiring to a non-alienated
and creative society based on equality and freedom should "break" with
bourgeois conceptions ... only to espouse the hierarchical, dogmatic,
manipulatory and puritanical ideas of [Leninism](Leninism "wikilink").
It might appear odd that their "rejection" of the irrational and
arbitrarily imposed behaviour patterns of bourgeois society, with its
demands for uncritical obedience and acceptance of authority, should
take the form of that epitome of alienated activity: following the
tortuous "line" of a [vanguard Party](vanguard_Party "wikilink"). It
might seem strange that those who urge people to think for themselves
and to resist the brainwashing of the [mass
media](Mass_Media "wikilink") should be filled with anxiety whenever new
ideas raise their troublesome heads within their own ranks.[^2] Or that
revolutionaries today should still seek to settle personal scores
through resort to the methods prevailing in the bourgeois jungle
outside. But, as we shall show, there is an internal coherence in all
this apparent irrationality.

## Notes

<references />

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink") [Category:The
Irrational in Politics](Category:The_Irrational_in_Politics "wikilink")

[^1]: The popular vote for Nazi candidates in the last stages of the
    Weimar Republic increased from 800,000 to 6.5 millions in September
    1930. See A Rosenberg, *A History of the German Republic* (London:
    Methuen, 1936), pp. 275, 304.

[^2]: We have recently heard it quite seriously proposed in an allegedly
    libertarian organization - [our own](Solidarity_(UK) "wikilink") -
    that no one should speak on behalf of the organization before
    submitting the substance of his proposed comments to a "meetings
    committee", lest anything new be suddenly sprung on the unsuspecting
    and presumably defenceless ranks of the ideologically emancipated.