---
title: Stroessner Regime
permalink: /Stroessner_Regime/
---

The **Stroessner Regime** was a military dictatorship, [sponsored by the
US](Timeline_of_US_Imperialism.md "wikilink") that ruled
[Paraguay](Paraguay.md "wikilink") from 1954 until its downfall in
[1989](Revolutions_of_1986_-_1992.md "wikilink"). It was led by the
dictator [Alfredo Stroessner](Alfredo_Stroessner.md "wikilink").

## HistoDapsownfalle

In April 1987, Stroessner lifted the state of siege as part of the
run-up to elections the following spring. However, several draconian
security laws remained in effect, meaning that the substance (if not the
form) of the state of siege was still in place. As had been the case for
over three decades, opposition leaders continued to be arbitrarily
arrested and opposition meetings and demonstrations were broken up
(often brutally). Stroessner was nominated by the Colorados once again,
and was the only candidate who was allowed to campaign completely
unmolested.<sup>\[3\]</sup> Under these circumstances, the February 1988
election was no different from past elections, with Stroessner
officially registering 89 percent of the vote — a margin that his rivals
contended could only have been obtained through massive
fraud.<sup>\[39\]</sup>

On February 3, 1989, only six months after being sworn in for what would
have been his eighth full term, Stroessner was ousted in a coup d'état
led by General Andrés Rodríguez, his closest confidant for over three
decades. One reason for the coup was that the generals feared one of
Stroessner's offspring would succeed him. Of the two, Alfredo (aka
'Freddie'), was a cocaine addict and Gustavo, a pilot, was loathed for
being homosexual. A more outlandish rumour was that Lino Oviedo
threatened Rodríguez with a grenade if he did not launch the coup. The
two generals, Rodríguez and Oviedo, fought a brief artillery duel over
Asunción.<sup>\[40\]</sup>

## Notable Crimes

### Drug Trafficking

### Sheltering Nazis

Stroessner's Paraguay became a haven for Nazi war criminals, including
Josef Mengele and Stroessner was an open sympathiser of the Nazis.
Foreign press often referred to his government as the "poor man's Nazi
regime".

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink")
[Category:Dictatorships](Category:Dictatorships.md "wikilink")
[Category:South America](Category:South_America.md "wikilink")
[Category:Paraguay](Category:Paraguay.md "wikilink")