---
title: Sunagawa Struggle (Japan)
permalink: /Sunagawa_Struggle_(Japan)/
---

The **Sunagawa Struggle** was an effort by farmers, leftists and
students in [Japan](Japan "wikilink") to stop the construction of a [US
military base](Timeline_of_US_Imperialism "wikilink") in western Tokyo
in [1955 and
1957](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Eastern_Asia "wikilink").

## Background

The Tachikawa Air Force Base (AFB) was a US airfield in western Tokyo.
The US military and the Japanese government planned to use this airfield
for transporting [nuclear weapons](Nuclear_Weapons "wikilink"). In order
to accommodate for the larger aircraft needed to transport these
weapons, the Tachikawa AFB needed to expand and lengthen the runway for
longer landing and takeoff distances. However, that meant that the
government would need to use the surrounding farmland for the expansion.
The US military announced the plans for expansion in 1955.

## Events

In response, farmers, villagers, students, unionists, and Buddhist
priests in Sunagawa, the small village adjacent to the Tachikawa AFB,
began a campaign of nonviolent interjection and occupation of their own
farmland in order to physically prevent officials from surveying and
taking their land. Protests began in October 1956. On the 12th of
October, [police](police "wikilink") beat villagers and demonstrators
with clubs, injuring 260 people. The next day, four thousand people
including Diet (Japanese Parliament) members from the Socialist party,
the Councilor of the Communist Party, and First Secretary Sanzo Nosaka
created a human barricade against the surveyors.

The crowd came within 160 metres of the base when police began to
physically remove, trample, kick, and poke at the eyes of picketers as
authorities forcibly tried to take land by driving stakes into the
ground. Members of the Diet led the protest by linking arms and forming
a human blockade while Buddhist priests in white robes beat incessantly
on drums, the sound of which competed with the drone of the planes
overhead and became an audio symbol of the movement. A total of 730
people including medical units, reporters, and cameramen were injured
that day.

That same day, fifty leading men of culture including ex-Premier Tetsu
Katayama, ex-Justice Minister Akira Kazami, ex-Foreign Minister Hachire
Arita, and prominent lawyer Shinkichi Unno launched the Defend Sunagawa
Campaign. They declared that expansion of the base was undesirable and
that the survey and plans to launch nuclear attacks violated the
Japanese Constitution, which protects the rights of the Japanese people
and forbids all kinds of warfare. They also argued that the expansion
program was never ratified by the Diet. A few days later, a policeman
committed suicide in protest against the government policy.

### Sunagawa Riots

By the 15th of October, 10,000 people were involved in the protest,
1,000 had been injured, and another thousand had been arrested. The
tension culminated in the “Sunagawa Riots”, which took place on the 8th
of July, 1957. That day, protestors managed to break past the police and
into the base through sheer numbers. 23 people were arrested and seven
were indicted on criminal trespassing charges.

## Results

After the Sunagawa riots, the US military canceled the construction
program in 1957, officially announcing its decision to not build
Tachikawa AFB in 1968. The campaign inspired the [Sanrizuka
Struggle](Sanrizuka_Struggle "wikilink") against civilian Narita Airport
in 1966.

## References

[Global Nonviolent Action
Database](Global_Nonviolent_Action_Database "wikilink") - [Sunagawa
farmers prevent expansion of Tachikawa Air Force Base,
1956-57](https://nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu/content/sunagawa-farmers-prevent-expansion-tachikawa-air-force-base-1956-57)

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Japan](Category:Japan "wikilink")
[Category:1955](Category:1955 "wikilink")
[Category:1956](Category:1956 "wikilink")
[Category:1957](Category:1957 "wikilink")
[Category:1950s](Category:1950s "wikilink") [Category:20th
Century](Category:20th_Century "wikilink")
[Category:Anti-Imperialism](Category:Anti-Imperialism "wikilink")
[Category:Asia](Category:Asia "wikilink") [Category:Eastern
Asia](Category:Eastern_Asia "wikilink") [Category:Land
Defense](Category:Land_Defense "wikilink")
[Category:Anti-Militarism](Category:Anti-Militarism "wikilink")