---
title: Tahitian General Strike (2010)
permalink: /Tahitian_General_Strike_(2010)/
---

The **Tahitian General Strike of 2010** was a [general
strike](List_of_General_Strikes.md "wikilink") in Tahiti ([French
Polynesia](French_Polynesia.md "wikilink"), a
[colony](French_Empire.md "wikilink") of [France](France.md "wikilink")) in
[2010](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Oceania.md "wikilink") calling
for massive economic reform.

## Background

Tahiti

Tahiti was first made into a French colony in 1880 and then, along with
the rest of the Polynesian islands, became a French territory in 1946.
Since then, Tahiti has been the economic center of French Polynesia.

Under the government of Charles de Gaulle, France began testing nuclear
weapons in the Pacific Ocean near French Polynesia. The testing would
continue for 36 years, before nuclear testing was officially put to an
end after international protest in 1996. The collateral damage of the
tests would affect the French Polynesian population for years and years.
Internal studies from French Polynesia suggested that even ten years
after the last test, the magnified effects of the nuclear testing were
responsible for up to 600 cases of cancer and 250 deaths per year.

Once the tests concluded, the French Polynesian economy suffered. In
2006, French Polynesia slipped into a recession and one economist
estimated the unemployment rate to be at 20%. As unemployment increased,
the gap between the rich and the poor continued to widen.

In 2010, situations in Tahiti and in the rest of French Polynesia had
not improved. The news of the recession and the side effects of the
nuclear testing intensified resentment on the islands. Consequently, on
June 4, several Tahitian labor unions announced the possibility of a
future strike if measures were not taken to improve the economy. On the
same day, a major Tahitian labor union, A Tia I Mua, announced that it
would not be participating in the strike because the economy was not
ready for it. Four days later, representatives from the unions met with
Tahitian president, Gaston Tong Sang, to negotiate a preventative
agreement. The demands of the labor unions were: secure pensions,
unemployment insurance, welfare reform, and for France to pay the
healthcare costs for victims of radiation exposure from the nuclear
testing. After debating which of the representatives were going to meet
with the president, the unions met with Tong Sang, but did not reach an
agreement.

After unsuccessful negotiations, the coalition of labor unions started a
general strike on June 10. The coalition, which called itself the
Collective for Peace (CFP), was composed of port workers, airport fire
fighters, civil servants, teachers, and hospital workers. The Collective
for Peace promised not to blockade the roads because it did not want to
interfere with high school exams. Local church leaders also spoke out
against road blockades, warning not to disrupt the daily lives of the
Tahitian people.

The next day, the CFP met with President Tong Sang in order to reopen
negotiations, but the CFP representatives left the meeting after just
two unproductive hours. Another negative moment for the campaign
occurred when two striking airport firemen were forced to work in order
to assure a plane’s safe landing. In retaliation, the CFP broke its
promise and set up blockades on one of the main roads in Tahiti’s
capital city, Papeete. The road connected to an area where Tahiti’s
gasoline and fuel tanks were stored. The blockade nearly paralyzed the
port and the airport; 2,500 travelers were left stranded at Tahiti’s
airport.

More negotiations were held on Friday June 11 between Tong Sang and the
CFP, but meetings once again ended abruptly and unsuccessfully; the
meeting began Friday afternoon and ended at 4 a.m. on Saturday. No
further meetings were held over the weekend.

Long periods of negotiation resumed on Monday, the 14th. By this point,
Tahiti’s economy was suffering. Local stations were running out of fuel,
as the road to the fuel storage remained obstructed. Consequently, many
flights to and from Tahiti were canceled or delayed.

By 1 a.m. on Tuesday morning, the general strike was called off because
negotiations concluded with an agreement supported by both parties. The
agreement ordered the end of the general strike on the conditions that
President Tong Sang would meet with the International Labour
Organisation in order to investigate the viability of an unemployment
insurance fund and also that he attend negotiations in Paris to discuss
pensions for civil servants. The CFP agreed to the accord despite it not
achieving any of its stated goals. All Tong Sang agreed to was to
consider two of the CFP’s demands: unemployment insurance and secure
pensions. The CFP had no success reaching an agreement about
compensation for victims of radiation exposure or about comprehensive
welfare reform. History will label this general strike a major failure
because it did not meet its stated goals and the strike burdened Tahiti
with even more economic loss. Tourism professionals released a statement
indicating that Tahiti was set to lose \$10 million because of the
general strike. The statement also speculated that the strike would have
a negative effect on future tourist trips to Tahiti.