---
title: Talamanca Anti-Oil Movement
permalink: /Talamanca_Anti-Oil_Movement/
---

The **Talamanca Anti-Oil Movement** or **Talamanca Anti-Oil Campaign**
refers to a massive campaign to completely ban [oil
drilling](Fossil_Fuels "wikilink") from the Talamanca region of [Costa
Rica](Costa_Rica "wikilink") from [1999 to
2002](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Central_America "wikilink")
led by [indigenous groups](Indigenism "wikilink") and
[environmentalists](Environmentalism "wikilink").

## Background

In November 1999, newspapers and local media outlets in Talamance
informed residents that a deal had been broken between the Costa Rican
government and US oil companies allowing them to begin drilling in the
region.

## Events

Angered by the fact that their communities had not been consulted in the
deal, and foreseeing the ecological devastation and economic
exploitation that would result from oil exploration in their region,
Talamancan residents formed the [Anti-Petroleum Action
(ADELA)](Anti-Petroleum_Action_(ADELA) "wikilink") coalition to protest
the concessions. Comprised of environmentalists, indigenous groups,
indigenous rights organizations, religious groups, community groups,
farmers’ organizations, fishermen’s unions, small-business owners,
marine biologists, and eco-tourism organizations, ADELA sought to repeal
the decision of allowing oil companies to drill in their communities.
Over the next three years, a long line of lawsuits, public debates and
protest marches were lead by ADELA. The oil company began also paying
for its own media in the area, promising well-paying jobs to poor and
unemployed residents. However, ADELA eventually won with superior
numbers.

## Result

The campaign not only resulted in a ban of oil drilling in the region,
but also a total ban of future open-cut mining projects in Costa Rica.
It also demonstrated the ability of community groups, organised workers,
scientists, environmentalists and indigenous people to work together and
defeat much more powerful governments and corporations.

## References

<https://nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu/content/costa-rican-communities-defeat-us-oil-companies-protect-local-environment-1999-2002>

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Events](Category:Events "wikilink") [Category:Costa
Rica](Category:Costa_Rica "wikilink") [Category:Central
America](Category:Central_America "wikilink")
[Category:Environmentalism](Category:Environmentalism "wikilink")
[Category:Indigenism](Category:Indigenism "wikilink")
[Category:1999](Category:1999 "wikilink") [Category:20th
Century](Category:20th_Century "wikilink")
[Category:2002](Category:2002 "wikilink") [Category:21st
Century](Category:21st_Century "wikilink")
[Category:1990s](Category:1990s "wikilink")
[Category:2000s](Category:2000s "wikilink")