---
title: The end of the year festival days (GIY2100)
permalink: /The_end_of_the_year_festival_days_(GIY2100)/
---

**The end of the year festival days** is the second chapter of the book
[Glimpses into the Year
2100](Glimpses_into_the_Year_2100_(Book) "wikilink") by Ilan Shalif.

## The end of the year festival days

Ri got up slowly. No need to hurry today — the first of the five
end-of-year days. After getting up and visiting the dining hall with his
mate, Ti, and their youngest girl (aged 5) Di, they sat in the
communication corner and opened the family statistics.

First, they looked at their energy consumption records. Last year, they
had reached their limit a few decimers before the end of the year (the
decimer, or 10-day period, replaced the old 7-day week) as a result of
Ti’s hobby of scooter driving. But as the rest of the grassroots
community was far from reaching its limit, the requests of Ti and a few
others for an increase in their energy consumption quota had been
approved. This year, they were just a bit below the family quota limit.

After that, together with Di, they looked through her statistics for the
year. They were glad to see that she hadn’t gone over the limit for any
of the sections — clothes, foods, sweets, toys, etc. Indeed, they
noticed that her use of luxuries fell far short of her quota, so they
discussed the various options and, in the end, Di decided that she would
spend what remained of her quota on a trip to the far-off mountains with
her five fellow affinity group members. (The basic educational unit and
the new living-space units were arranged in such a way as to accommodate
six new births per year.

Babies were usually born at the end of spring, so expectant parents
moved to new living-space units after the autumn, after pregnancies had
passed their initial medical checks. The new design of these
living-space units better suited both the privacy of each child and
couple, and also enabled 24-hour care for the children, who had their
own affinity group space until they grew up and joined the company of
the older children.)

Then, they went to the sports centre where they played a few games of
table tennis with various partners. In their teens, Ti and Ri had been
enthusiastic table tennis players and had participated in many district
and all-city tournaments. They had got to know each other better and
after a while moved in together into Ti’s community. Now it seemed that
Di was intending to follow in their footsteps, though it was still a bit
too early to conclude that it was the sport she loved best.

Like on the other special days, Di did not return to her living space to
eat with her own group and instead accompanied her parents to have
dinner at the dining hall. After the meal, they returned to the group
living space for their midday nap.

When they got up, the screen on their com unit was flashing. On
approaching it, they saw the latest news: the need for the commune
factory’s products (special medical supplies) had dropped due to some
innovation in hospital procedures. This meant the grassroots community
assembly would have to find an alternative for a significant part of the
work they contributed to the society that lay outside their community.

The members of the workplace production committee were urged to start
studying some alternatives before the next meeting of the committee, so
they would be able to prepare it in time for preliminary discussion at
the coming DD assembly.

The main alternatives given were: first, to increase production of other
items or new items by the commune’s old factory. Second, just increase
the number of work shifts of community members in other community,
district or city workplaces. And third, build a new production facility
to replace the old one, which would need a commitment by members to take
on a long-term mandate to work there, as it would require a significant
period of training.

Ri and Ti, who were among the commune members who contributed a
significant amount of their work shifts quota to the old factory,
discussed the subject at length.

Ti tended towards the third option. Ri, who had been involved over the
last few years with the community’s educational committee and recently
with the district committee, raised the possibility of his wanting to
train to become an educator in the district educational system. Over the
years he had been ambivalent about the subject. His mother was a
well-known educator and still worked in this capacity. As a child and
teenager it had seemed to him that an educational mandate made people
too serious and was not compatible with his involvement in light music.
However, he was very relaxed with youngsters, and the education
committee suggested time and again that he become an educator. Once, in
spite of his reluctance, the subject was even brought up at a DD
community assembly discussion, but the community accepted his refusal of
the mandate.

After a while Di joined them for late-afternoon tea and cookies and both
had a nice surprise when Di’s big brother Ted joined them. Excitedly, he
told them about the small theatre show his affinity group had prepared
for the community festival and the possibility that it would be chosen
for the district festival the next day.

The community’s announcement system started to play the evening festival
theme music that had been adopted just after the revolution in 2050. The
music was a kind of a magical march for them and it accompanied them and
all the members of the community to the dining hall. Among the walkers
were some wheelchairs with the old folks who were too frail to walk.
Most of them, as well as some of the “younger” veterans who were proudly
walking, wore the honorary hat of that was given to participants in the
uprising that had sparked off the revolution.

The tables were arranged around a small stage and waiting for them was
the traditional meal of the poor wage-slaves in the harsh years that had
preceded the revolution.

After the meal, one by one, small theatrical groups presented short
sketches on life before the revolution and during the next 50 years.
Then the tables and chairs were cleared away and the hall turned into a
dance hall with local musicians taking turns on stage, playing old and
new tunes while people danced the night away.

When Di was too sleepy to stay any longer, Ti and Ri left Ted with
friends and returned to the dwelling area to put Di to bed. Having said
goodnight, they ensured that one of the other parents in the dwelling
area would stay there, awake, to look after the children and returned to
the dance.