---
title: The Walking Dead: Season One (Video Game)
permalink: /The_Walking_Dead:_Season_One_(Video_Game)/
---

**The Walking Dead: Season One** is a 2012 [video
game](List_of_Video_Games.md "wikilink") that follows Lee Everett, a
37-year old history professor trying to survive a zombie apocalypse in
Georgia, [USA](United_States_of_America.md "wikilink").

## Summary

The game is divided into 5 episodes, each about two hours long.

### Episode One: A New Day

Lee Everett has recently been convicted for murdering someone who was
cheating with his wife. Being driven down a highway from Atlanta,
Georgia to a nearby prison, his car crashes after hitting a zombie,
knocking Lee unconscious. Upon waking up, he escapes from the car and a
nearby group of zombies and into a suburban neighbourhood, where he
meets a young girl left abandoned in a house named Clementine. He
decides to look after her, and they soon meet a man named Shawn Greene,
who takes them to his fathers farm, where they meet Kenny, a commercial
fisherman, and his wife Katjaa, a vet, and their son Duck. However, a
horrific accident involving a tractor and zombies kills Shawn, and they
are kicked off the farm. Kenny agrees to drive Lee to Macon, where Lee's
family lives, but their car runs out of petrol and are nearly eaten by
horde before being saved by two mysterious strangers, who are hiding in
a pharmacy owned by Lee's parents.

Upon entering the pharmacy, they find a small group of five, Lilly, a
levelheaded air force bureaucrat, her father, Larry, an angry retired US
army commander, Glenn, a local pizza delivery man and college dropout,
Carley, a TV reporter and Doug, a computer repairman. The group explodes
into an argument over speculation about if Duck has been bitten, with
Kenny threatening to kill Larry. The stress leads to Larry having a
heart attack, and a horde surrrounding the pharmacy, but they all go
quiet and the zombies leave. Lee eventually unlocks the door to the
medicine storage in the pharmacy after helping Glenn rescue a bitten and
suicidal girl at a motel (who shoots herself by stealing a gun from
them) but soon finds a loud alarm being triggered by breaking into the
medicine storage. The group evacuates the area and goes to a nearby
motel, but depending on Lee's choices, Doug or Carley gets killed in the
escape, and Glenn leaves the group for Atlanta. The remaining survivors
all agree to fortify the motel until help from the government arrives,
before the electricity goes out, ending the episodes.

### Episode Two: Starved for Help

Set three months later, the motel survivors have largely fortified it
and added a new member to their group, Mark, who was stationed at a
nearby unseen air force base. The group is largely starving and has
resorted to rationing their limited food supplies, and Mark, Lee and
Kenny are out in the forest hunting, before hearing a screaming man
trapped in a bear trap. He reveals himself to be David, a high school
teacher with two former students, Travis and Ben. His screams attract a
horde of zombies as Lee tries to help him, but either David or Travis
dies. Returning to the motel with wounded, an argument erupts with Lilly
over food shortages and bringing new people, leaving Lilly to tell Lee
to do rationing in anger. After this, David or Travis dies from wounds,
turning into a zombie and nearly killing Katjaa and Lee, leading to
anger at Ben for not telling them his friend was bitten. But Ben
explains that you become a zombie no matter what unless your brain is
destroyed.

Two strange men, Andy and Danny St John arrive outside the motel, and
offer to trade fuel for food, explaining that they live on a nearby
dairy farm protected by an electric fence. The group agrees, and Lee,
Ben, Doug or Carley and Mark all head down to the farm to check it out
and negotiate a deal, and find that the farm is real and they have
plenty of food and meet Brenda St. John, the mother of the boys. Lee and
Mark offer to do favours around the farm, but are attacked by bandits
while repairing the fence, one of whom seriously injures Mark with a
crossbow. Brenda offers to take care of him and Danny offers to help Lee
investigate a nearby bandit camp to get payback. They find the camp
abandoned but Lee finds that one of them had tried to kidnap Clementine,
and is confronted by her, a lone and traumatised woman who's young
daughter was kidnapped and raped by the other bandits. Lee or Danny
shoot her, and they return to the farm.

The whole group is now staying at the farm, except for Ben and Doug or
Carley, and most are in the barn as Katjaa treats a sick cow. Kenny and
Lilly are suspicious about the farm, notably the barn. So Lee sabotages
the electric fence so that the St Johns will look at it and he can sneak
into the barn, discovering lots of blood-covered tools, but Andy catches
him in the act, but explains that its just for hunting and skinning
animals. Upon having dinner, Lee leaves to wash his hands, and enters
the room Mark should be staying in but doesn't see him there, and finds
him trapped in a hidden room with his legs cut off to be used as meat.
Lee runs downstairs and tells the group that the St Johns are cannibals,
and is soon knocked out and placed in a meat locker with Larry, Lilly,
Kenny and Clementine.

Lee wakes up and Larry has a serious heart attack, leading Kenny to
think that Larry will turn into a zombie and they'll be trapped with
him. Kenny kills Larry by crushing his head with a salt lick, making
Lilly (who was trying to revive him) furious. Clementine is also
distressed by the act. Lee works out that you can get out through the
air conditioning duct, but only Clementine can fit through. She escapes
and unlocks the door, and Lee attacks Danny, trapping him in a bear
trap. In the house, Brenda has taken Katjaa hostage, but a zombified
Mark attacks Brenda and Lee eventually fights Andy, freeing the rest of
the group as they escape the farm. On the way back, they find a recently
abandoned car full of food and supplies, and debate about whether or not
they should steal from it. Lee also discovers that the crazy women from
earlier had been spying on the group for weeks, and that without a food
source from the St. Johns, bandits might attack the motel.

### Episode Three: Long Road Ahead

Back at the motel, Kenny and Lee realise that the town of Macon they've
relied on for supplies has almost run out of anything they can use, and
Kenny and Lilly argue at the motel about if they should leave into an RV
Kenny has fixed or not. Lilly suspects someone has been stealing
supplies from the group's inventory, and Lee discovers that someone had
been giving them to bandits. The motel is attacked by bandits shortly
after, and the motel is overrun by zombies attracted by the gunfire. The
group all flees in the RV, and begins driving towards Savannah to find a
boat. During the trip Lilly accuses someone in the group of stealing
supplies, and eventually shoots Doug or Carley and is kicked out of the
group, it's also revealed that Duck has been bitten.

## External Links

- [The Walking Dead: Season
  One](https://walkingdead.fandom.com/wiki/The_Walking_Dead_(Video_Game))
  at walkingdead.wiki

[Category:Zombies](Category:Zombies.md "wikilink") [Category:Libertarian
Socialist Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink")
[Category:Video Games](Category:Video_Games.md "wikilink")