---
title: The Weakness of a Politics of Protest
permalink: /The_Weakness_of_a_Politics_of_Protest/
---

**The Weakness of a Politics of Protest** is a 2000 article by [James
Herod](James_Herod "wikilink") that is criticial of the marches and
demonstrations common in cities done for 'social change', instead
advocating for [organising](organising "wikilink").

## Transcript

<em>Expanded slightly November 2000 and January 2001</em>

<em>"Unfortunately, with the growing popularity of [these
struggles](Global_Justice_Movement "wikilink") \[against the WTO, IMF,
and WB\] amongst broad sections of the left, we can already begin to see
this developing movement shifting further in the direction of polite
reform rather than open resistance. Even among many anarchists, we can
see an abandonment of explicitly radical opposition in favor of
embracing a predominantly reformist agenda put forward by the
left-liberals and NGO-types. With this in mind, we feel that
revolutionary anarchists have a major role to play within this social
movement... For us, these institutions are beyond reform, since they
play key roles within a global capitalist system that must be abolished
outright. Not only must we reject and resist this system at every
possible level, we must also put forward a clear anarchist alternative
that has the ability to capture the imagination of the oppressed on a
large-scale and point towards the direction of true social
liberation."</em>

Statement from a contemporary militant anarchist.

This 'major role' that anarchists are expected to play in the movement,
to 'radicalize' it, will be a disappointing one, because it will not
succeed. In a Politics of Protest, with its invariable split between
reformists and revolutionaries, the reformists almost always win,
because the ruling class sides with them, in order to take the steam out
of the movement and neutralize it, knowing that they can always renege
on the reforms later after all the commotion has died down. This defeat
is rooted in the Politics of Protest itself, and does not simply
indicate that revolutionaries didn't try hard enough to 'radicalize' the
movement. As long as we are merely fighting against what we
<em>don't</em> want, instead of fighting for what we <em>do</em> want,
we will always lose.

Fighting for what we want involves a lot more than putting forward "a
clear anarchist alternative", especially if such a 'putting forward' is
limited to verbal descriptions. The only way that we could really put
forward an anarchist alternative would be to try to bring it into being
in the real social world, to try to actually create, the new social
arrangements which we think should replace those of capitalism. And to
do this we would have to shift the focus of our attention, from
protesting what they are doing to us to defending what we are doing to
them. We would have to go on the offensive. We would have to pick new
battlefields, new strategic sites upon which to wage our struggle. I
believe that there are three such strategic sites -- neighborhood
assemblies, workplace assemblies, and household assemblies. If we were
trying to set up these new social arrangements, and then fighting to
defend our creations, we would be building the world we want while
simultaneously undermining and defeating capitalists.

What does it really mean to "reject and resist this system at every
possible level"? Doesn't real rejection mean putting something else in
its place? This is the real rejection -- to gut and abandon what we
don't want by instead putting our energies into creating what we do
want. Is bulldozing a Macdonald's enough? Does stopping a meeting or two
of the world trade ministers do the trick? Do spring and fall
demonstrations in the nation's capital accomplish much? Will disrupting
the democratic and republican conventions change anything?

A Politics of Protest is a doomed strategy. It does not lead anywhere.
It will exhaust itself in arguments over non-violence, civil
disobedience, reform (and in getting the protesters out of jail). And
all this while, the ruling class will be using the time thus gained to
update, retool, regroup, devise new counter tactics, and refurbish its
ideology. Plus it now has the windfall of having pictures of all the
protesters, the names and addresses of all the organizations that
planned the protest, and copies of all the speeches delivered to be
analyzed and studied with an eye to rebutting and discrediting them.
Even if there are 30,000 or 100,000 such protesters, and 1000 or 10,000
such organizations, they can easily be identified, investigated,
targeted, infiltrated, disrupted, studied, neutralized, intimidated,
co-opted, or destroyed, by the vast bureaucracy, military, and secret
police of the world's ruling classes.

The left's usual response to this point is to say that therefore we have
to have 'massive' protests, and then they wouldn't be able to stop us.
Wrong! They could, and have, like with the destruction of Vietnam, the
[mass murder](New_Order_(Indonesia)#Mass_Killings_in_1960s "wikilink")
of several hundred thousand people in Indonesia in 1965, the
thoroughgoing destruction of the [New Left](New_Left "wikilink"), the
death squads in Central America in the eighties, the [extermination of a
quarter of the
population](Indonesian_Occupation_of_East_Timor "wikilink") of East
Timor, the invasions of Grenada and Panama, the seventy-eight days of
bombings in Yugoslavia in 1999, the ongoing sanctions and bombings in
Iraq, the assassinations and massacres taking place right now in
Colombia.

But what if we changed direction entirely, and stopped spending all our
time trying to stop the crimes of capitalists, and started fighting
instead for what we really want? What if the 15,000 towns in the United
States with 2,500 inhabitants or less started switching to direct
democracy, through neighborhood assemblies, scuttling their hierarchical
mayoral governments, something they could easily do if they wanted to?
What if peasant villages started converting to cooperative labor? What
if workers in stores, offices, and factories forgot about unions and
started setting up workplace assemblies to get control over their lives
there? What if neighbors on a block started combining resources to
create households of 100 to 200 persons? This could become a large
movement, but not a mass movement, that is, not one made up of isolated
individuals (even if they are in temporary affinity groups) coalescing
for a few hours in the streets of the capitals of the world. Rather, it
would be a movement made up of communities of people, and thus would be
a cooperative movement, at its very roots. A new social order cannot be
built in the streets, but only in our neighborhoods, workplaces, and
households. [Capitalism](Capitalism "wikilink") cannot be defeated in
the streets, but only in our neighborhoods, workplaces, and households.

The trouble is, "we" do not know what "we" want. That is, there is no
objective, given, fixed definition of what 'radical' means. There is no
consensus of opinion even about what it means. There are as many
versions (vague ones) of what we want as there are tendencies in the
movement. Every group participating in a demonstration probably hopes to
further its own version of 'radical', and thus 'radicalize' the
movement. The question always is: Radicalized to what? The Living Wage
campaign? The Fair Trade campaign? The Leninist vanguard party? The
overthrow of capitalism? Social Democracy? Anarchism? Market socialism?
Or what?

Moreover, the deeply entrenched ban on utopian thinking, on figuring out
concretely what we want to replace capitalism with, continues in effect,
hardly being challenged at all from any quarter. Thus instead of
powerfully concentrating our mental and physical energies on solving
this problem, to eliminate this obstacle to defeating capitalism, we are
"taking to the streets" once again, merely protesting, merely engaging
in what is basically 'mindless activism'. It's true that the level of
analysis this time is considerably higher than in the sixties, and that
the targets -- sweatshops, the wto/wb/imf, genetically modified
organisms, and so forth -- are better (as opposed to the civil rights,
anti-war, and identity movements of the sixties), and lead almost
immediately to the questioning of property and trade and hence to a
critique of capitalism. But it is still just protesting, essentially
just petitioning the ruling class to change its policies. Even though
the protesters say that "we're going there to arrest those criminals"
everyone knows that it's just a joke, and that they can't. Even though
they tell the cops that they're "not welcome in our streets", it's quite
clear that in the end the streets belong to the cops. When they shout
that "this is what democracy sounds like" I suppose they mean that in a
democracy people can assemble where they will and express their
opinions, and also perhaps that democracy is noisy and chaotic. But
shouting in the streets by powerless people is not democracy;
deliberating in assemblies and having the power to make real decisions
is democracy.

We are running out of time. As capitalism continues to disintegrate over
the next half century, we will lose the opportunity to replace it with a
new egalitarian, democratic social order, unless we can figure out what
we want, in down-to-earth concrete terms, and get down to setting it up.
We have to know how we want to arrange things and how our new social
order will work. In the absence of such a concrete vision, and a
strategy to achieve it, the capitalist ruling classes will use the next
half century to invent a new social order that enables them to stay in
power and stay rich, even if not as capitalists. After all, the ruling
classes of feudalism, by transforming themselves into capitalists, did
just that.

Imagining anarchism, in very concrete terms, is thus not something
secondary, something that can be put off until capitalism is defeated,
something that will evolve automatically out of protesting and street
activism, something that no one can really know much about now. Rather
it is something that is absolutely central to defeating capitalism in
the first place, and something that should be given top priority by all
oppositionists. It cannot be put off until later. It must be dealt with
right now, or else we will lose our chance for liberation.

It's easy to agree on what to protest against. The list of things that
need to be stopped under capitalism is long, so long in fact that we
don't even need to agree; there is plenty to choose from, so just pick
something that suits you. Perhaps this is why so many activists get
involved in protesting. It's not so easy though to figure out what we
want to replace capitalism with, to work out convincing arguments about
how it will plausibly work, and to set about creating such a social
world, especially since so little energy is being devoted to the task.
The general principles of a free society are known in outline of course,
but not in concrete detail (but there are still plenty of disagreements
even about principles, for example, whether to keep or abolish the
state, the market, jobs). Perhaps this is why so few people get involved
in building a new world, but content themselves with protesting against
the old.

The Politics of Protest is a weak politics, the politics of weakness,
the politics of weak people, with weak imaginations -- powerless people.
Powerless persons must use whatever tactics they can of course. But that
is the point. Why remain powerless, when by adopting a different
strategy -- building strategic associations -- we could become powerful
and not be reduced to impotent acts like civil disobedience and
demonstrations in the streets against policies we had no say in making?

I have spelled all this out in greater detail in my short book,
<em>[Getting Free: A Sketch of an Association of Democratic, Autonomous
Neighborhoods and How to Create
It](Getting_Free:_A_Sketch_of_an_Association_of_Democratic,_Autonomous_Neighborhoods_and_How_to_Create_It "wikilink").</em>
<em>(a)</em> A short sketch of the new social arrangements which
<em>I</em> want is included there. I hope within a year or two or three
to post or publish a longer study, <em>Imagining Anarchism</em>, which
will compare in detail the few schemes that have been put forward to
date.

<strong>Further Discussion</strong>

<strong>A.</strong> I got a letter of response, and disagreement mostly,
from a friend about the above essay. Relevant parts (edited) of my
answer follow:

When I first read Jack’s response, I thought, "Well, of course he’s
right." But after mulling it over for a day or two I came to my senses.
His letter actually illustrates some of the points I was trying to make.
For example, Jack writes: "Do you think that it is sheer coincidence
that [after Seattle](Battle_of_Seattle "wikilink") countless anarchist
publications, book fairs, collectives, infoshops and activities have
sprung up throughout the country?" My point is this: publications, book
fairs, collectives, and infoshops cannot defeat capitalism or establish
anarchism. How come the people who went to Seattle to protest came away
with a desire to do those things, and not to start setting up
neighborhood, workplace, and household assemblies? Because book fairs
and infoshops are in the air, while assemblies are not. Very few
radicals are agitating that this other direction is the way we ought to
be going. Is this what radicalization means in practical terms --
publications, book fairs, collectives, and infoshops?

Jack also argued that most of these protesters are already involved in
"grassroots initiatives, collective endeavors, institutional
alternatives, workplace organizations, neighborhood associations, etc."
but claimed that there is nothing "implicitly revolutionary" about these
efforts.

The assumed meaning of "revolutionary" here, I feel sure, is
"anti-capitalist, anti-statist, anarchist," and on this we agree. I also
agree that most of the organizing now going on around neighborhoods,
workplaces, and households is reformist (i.e., not necessarily
anti-capitalist, and certainly not necessarily anarchist), and I said as
much in the pamphlet (<em>Getting Free</em>). So the struggle against
reformism is present in my projected strategy too, but at least there,
if it is overcome, you’ve got something, whereas overcoming reformism in
protest movements still leaves to be settled what to do next, that is,
what does anti-capitalism really look like, and what does anarchism
really mean in concrete terms. In fact I would argue that you can’t
overcome reformism in the abstract, but only in the concrete, in
concrete programs. Maybe overcoming reformism means to actually try to
set up functioning neighborhood assemblies, with real power to make
decisions that will stick, and the same for workplaces, and households,
and thereby to establish the core social arrangements for an anarchist
society, the successful defense of which will also destroy capitalism.

Jack then writes the following two very interesting sentences: "Most
people become radicalized through struggle, whether it is protesting,
labor strikes, or full fledged uprisings. I fail to see how anything
that you put forward as a viable alternative to "protest politics" could
possibly take place without this radicalization process." Here we see
this treacherous abstraction -- radicalization -- at work again,
together with an auxiliary abstraction -- struggle. To say that people
are "radicalized through struggle" is a meaningless claim. Most of the
millions of people who "struggled" for ten years against the Vietnam war
never became anti-capitalist. Most of the millions of blacks who
"struggled" for civil rights in the sixties never became
anti-capitalist, let alone anarchist. Most of the millions of people who
"struggled" for women’s rights, gay and lesbian rights, old people’s
rights, children’s rights, native american rights, young people’s
rights, latino rights, welfare mother rights, student rights, GI rights
-- never became anti-capitalist, let alone anarchist. Toward the end of
the sixties, there was a tiny fringe of people in the "movement" who
became radical, in the sense of wanting to destroy capitalism and change
the whole system, but by far the majority of these "revolutionaries"
became Leninists, or in a few cases, even Stalinists! There was also a
minority who were traditional socialists of one kind or another, but
there was only a tiny, tiny, tiny minority of New Leftists who became
anarchists, or [anarcho-syndicalists](Anarcho-Syndicalism "wikilink")
(or anti-bolshevik communists, or Third Road Radicals, as I used to
say), although I believe anarchist themes were a prominent part of the
New Left experience.

The protesters of the sixties, the New Left, kept at it for quite a long
time, nearly ten years, from the early sixties to the early seventies.
But they failed utterly to put forward a coherent program, a believable
vision of what they wanted, and consequently could never generate a
strategy to achieve that. Instead they focused mainly on reforms, and
were considerably successful on that front. Unfortunately, most of those
reforms started to be reversed already under Reagan in the eighties,
until by now only a few of them remain.

Wallerstein may be correct in claiming that the revolts of the sixties
were one of only two systemic, world revolutions against capitalism, the
other being in [1848](Revolutions_of_1848_-_1871 "wikilink"), both of
which went down to defeat. <em>(b)</em> And that is the point: the
revolts of the sixties failed, although they scared the hell out of
capitalists and forced them to make adjustments, and to retool, which of
course they did, having vast manpower and financial resources to do so.
"Lockdown America" <em>(c)</em> was only one of their responses. The
draconian anti-terrorist bill of 1996 was another (they’re still
retooling after 25 years). They started retooling immediately after
Seattle, exhibiting what has got to be a rapid learning curve for
police. Already by April 16 in Washington DC they had learned to cordon
off the area surrounding the targeted building. And then on to Windsor,
and Calgary. In Calgary they simply erected high fences, sealing off
blocks around the meeting place of the world’s oil ministers, preventing
protesters from getting anywhere near it.

It’s all too possible that the same thing could happen again now that
happened in the sixties. Contemporary anarchist collectives could spend
the next ten years protesting, and at the end of that time be no closer
to destroying capitalism and establishing anarchism than we
"revolutionaries" were at the end of the "movements" of the sixties (it
was all pretty much all over by 1972).

In truth, there is no such thing as a "radicalization process". There
are only concrete persons struggling for some program or other, lobbying
with others, trying to drum up support, trying to achieve the program
and turn it into reality. If they are not struggling for a concrete
program, but only for a vague program, for some philosophical
principles, or if they are only struggling against something they don’t
like, rather than for something they do like, then their cause is pretty
hopeless, and there is not much chance that they will accomplish any
significant changes at all.

A few months ago I heard a riveting speech by Kevin Danaher on
Alternative Radio. He was a dynamite speaker, and very radical (or so I
hought), and delivered a blistering attack on corporations. The other
day I bought a book he has recently edited (with coeditor Roger
Burbach), published by Common Courage Press, called <em>Globalize This:
The Battle Against the World Trade Organization and Corporate Rule.</em>
The last section of this book, eight articles, is devoted to what to do
about it all, and is called "Ways to Restructure the Global Economy".
There I find that naive reformist, William Greider, presenting his wish
list of national legislation that "we" should push through Congress,
many arguments for "fair trade, not free trade", a proposal to tax
foreign exchange transactions as a remedy for out-of-control
international financial speculation, proposals to make corporations
socially responsible, and a whole bunch of other reformist programs.
There is certainly nothing here about destroying capitalism, let alone
creating anarchism. (Actually, I had been alerted to this situation,
about Danaher, by an anarchist e-mail dispatch, probably from Chuck O,
in which he mentioned a lively exchange that had taken place between
Danaher and a black block anarchist -- I wish I had a copy of it, if it
was recorded or written up. I surely could have been informed about this
anyway if I had examined Global Exchange’s web site more carefully).

I suppose this is what was meant in the quote reproduced at the start of
this essay. It argued: "We can already begin to see this developing
movement shifting further in the direction of polite reform rather than
open resistance." But of course Global Exchange is not shifting. It has
always been reformist. Jim Hightower and Ralph Nader are not shifting.
Lori Wallach and Medea Benjamin are not shifting. They have always been
populists who merely want to restore American democracy to what they
think it once was. They may rail against large corporations, but they
have no problem with capitalism itself, or with small corporations, or
with American democracy as traditionally defined. What is evidently
happening then is that Danaher, Nader, Hightower, Wallach, and Benjamin
are winning more of the new activists over to their side than the
anarchists are. This is not surprising since that kind of populism is
closer to what most people in America believe anyway and therefore
doesn’t require as big a break with their pasts.

The opening quote contrasts ‘open resistance’ to ‘polite reform’ as if
‘open resistance’ is somehow automatically going to ‘radicalize’
activists. There was massive ‘open resistance’ ten years ago in Eastern
Europe which only resulted in the installation of a really barbarous,
mafia capitalism (although I recently acquired a book <em>(d)</em> which
argues that the collapse of the Soviet Union was a top down thing, that
it was engineered by the Soviet ruling class itself, and was not the
outcome of a disintegrating economy combined with massive uprisings).

Jack says that he believes strongly in a culture of resistance. I
believe equally strongly that a culture of resistance is not enough,
although naturally I’m very glad that one seems to be emerging once
again. A culture of resistance though is only <em>against</em>
something, oppression, not <em>for</em> something, liberation. I believe
that we have to start with what we want, with what anarchism is, defined
in very concrete terms, and then devise a strategy for achieving it. I
am well aware that this goes against the anti-utopian grain of much
revolutionary thinking, but it’s true nevertheless. It’s is simply not
enough to attack capitalism. Attacking capitalism, through a culture of
resistance, does not necessarily lead anywhere.

The organization of my pamphlet, <em>Getting Free</em>, reflects these
beliefs. I begin with a brief condemnation of capitalism, by describing
what I hate most about it. Then I sketch out briefly, but in concrete
detail, the kind of social arrangements which I would like and which I
believe constitute [anarchism](anarchism "wikilink") ([true
communism](Anarcho-Communism "wikilink")). Next I consider some of the
obstacles in the way of achieving such social arrangements, and some of
the strategies that have already been tried but have failed. Then I map
out, both in the abstract and in concrete detail, a strategy which I
believe would succeed in destroying capitalism and establishing
anarchism. This strategy is intimately linked to, and flows out of, the
goal, the program, that is, the concrete description of the social
arrangements which I believe would make up an anarchistic society.

The strategy which prevailed throughout most of this century,
[Leninism](Leninism "wikilink"), was also linked to a particular
definition of communism, one involving nationalization of resources, for
example, and so it focused on capturing the state. Sometimes I feel that
all the marches on Washington DC are in reality vestiges of leninism,
because the protesters go to the capital, and focus on the centers of
power, and the rulers residing there, rather than fighting their battles
in small towns, neighborhoods, or local communities. Some radicals have
been arguing recently that if we don’t have the political forces to stop
ruling class projects on the local level we probably can’t muster them
anywhere else.

If Wallerstein is correct in claiming that capitalism can only last at
most another fifty years, because of structural limitations to its
expansion (which expansion is essential for the system to keep operating
as a means of capital accumulation for the ruling class) <em>(e),</em>
then the foundations of a new social order have to be laid now, in the
next twenty-five years -- in other words by the present generation of
activists -- a challenge unprecedented in the long history of
anti-capitalist struggle. The ruling class will be working all this time
to transplant themselves into a new social order of their own making. If
we wait, if another twenty-five years goes by without significant
progress and clarification on the kind of society we want, then it will
be all that much harder, perhaps even impossible, to counter the plans
of the ruling class.

The fact that I am having to talk like this now, about "clarification on
the kind of society we want", points up a glaring failure on the part of
my generation. I should be able to point to a whole shelf full of books
by now, detailed studies which spell things out and examine concretely
the many problems. We didn’t do the work however, except now we do have
a few books coming out (e.g.. [Takis
Fotopoulos](Takis_Fotopoulos "wikilink"), <em>[Towards an Inclusive
Democracy](Towards_an_Inclusive_Democracy "wikilink")</em>). Instead,
and for the most part, and tragically, my generation’s energies went
into Identity Politics.

Perhaps I should throw the issue back in the laps my critics. If they
are not happy with the strategy I have outlined for getting out of
capitalism and into anarchism, can they come up with a better one? How
are they going to defeat capitalists? What will anarchism look like, in
concrete social terms, and how do they expect to set it up? And if they
give me the pat reply that it is too early to say in concrete terms what
anarchism will be and that that is something that will have to be
decided when the time comes by those actually making the revolution,
then I have another question for them? Aren’t they actually making the
revolution now? If they can’t picture anarchism concretely now, what
makes them think they will be able to do so ten or twenty years down the
road? After all, my generation hid behind this excuse thirty years ago,
but now, a generation later, we have no clearer idea of what we want
than we did then. Many militants are busy protesting. How are they goin
to get from protesting to what they really want? Some are busy setting
up anarchist organizations of various kinds. In other words, they are
organizing other radicals, instead of setting up anarchist social
arrangements directly. How do they expect to get from these
organizations, which are one step removed from anarchism, to anarchism
itself?

<strong>B</strong>. Excerpts from a letter to another friend in
November, 2000, continuing the discussion.

I have been intending to revise "The Weakness of a Politics of Protest"
to soften or qualify my criticisms somehow. I have felt like a real heel
criticizing these new movements, because, as I have expressed several
times in letters to friends, they have been fantastic and inspiring, and
have accomplished a lot. They took me completely by surprise, although I
guess they have been building for half-a-decade at least, and if I had
been more in touch or more alert I would have picked up on this. I was
even fairly close in the mid-nineties to a group of young militant
anarchists, but somehow I missed the scope and strength of their
activities.

Nevertheless, it seems that we are deeply wedded to a particular tactic.
Whenever we get upset and agitated and want to do something, all we can
think of is pouring into the streets, in demonstrations, rallies, and
marches. I was reminded recently, in the process of preparing a
bibliographical guide to anarchist writings, and in looking up
references to anarchist uprisings from the [German peasant war of
1525](German_Peasants'_War "wikilink") on down, that this is no new
thing. The peasants of early modern times poured into the streets and
roads, and marched. Thomas Munzer participated in one such march, on
Mulhausen, in 1525, where they took over the town council, and where
Munzer was later captured, and beheaded (while Martin Luther sat
comfortably with his Princes). There were marches and demonstrations in
the [English revolution of 1640](English_Civil_War "wikilink"). The
[sans-culottes](Sans-Culottes "wikilink"), in the [French
Revolution](French_Revolution "wikilink"), poured into the streets, and
set up barricades, to defend their working class neighborhoods, where
they had established self-government. There were demonstrations and
marches all over Europe in the insurrections of 1848. And so on down
through all the great revolutions of modern times. I saw once the eight
hour BBC documentary of the [Spanish
Revolution](Spanish_Revolution "wikilink"), and was simply amazed by the
marches they had, involving hundreds of thousands of people at a time.
One march they filmed in Madrid toward the end of the war must have had
half-a-million people.

In almost all cases, though, in these historical events, it was not just
marches and demonstrations, but also the setting up of local assemblies,
and agricultural and/or industrial councils. This was true in the
peasant wars, in the French Revolution, the [American
Revolution](American_Revolution "wikilink"), the [Paris
Commune](Paris_Commune "wikilink"), 1905 in Russia, 1917 in Russia,
1918-19 in Germany, 1936-39 in Spain, 1956 in Hungary, 1980-82 in
Poland, and so forth. (This -- the setting up of assemblies -- does not
seem to have happened in the great popular uprisings in Eastern Europe
in 1989.)

So the pattern we have seen in our country, say in the 1960s, with the
incessant spring and fall marches on Washington, D.C., or during this
past year in Seattle, Philadelphia, and Los Angeles, is no new thing,
but has deep historical roots. I’m convinced even so that it is a badly
flawed strategy, a regretful way of resisting. In the early seventies I
wrote a paper against the tactic of mass demonstrations, especially
those which focused on capital cities. I argued that they drained energy
and resources away from local initiatives. Although they brought ‘highs’
to the participants, they also brought ‘lows’, after everyone had
returned home. <em>(f)</em> "Taking to the streets" is not a strategy;
it is a bad habit.

The first full length history of <em>The</em> <em>Russian
Revolution</em> I read, in 1971, by Marcel Liebman, impressed me by how
much of the action took place in streets. They also set up councils of
course. But most of the action, by the great majority, was in the
streets. I thought at the time that this showed that they were simply
not ready to take power for themselves and keep it. They didn’t know
how. They could only act as a "mass", not as participants in a direct,
deliberative democracy, for which they didn’t have the social
arrangements, and probably not even, for the most part, the social
skills. And so they ended up with Lenin.

The striking thing to note of course is the pattern of defeat evident in
this long history of revolt. Nowhere, not once, did the most radical
militants win (at least not for very long). Those who were fighting for
egalitarian, directly democratic, local, self-rule have always lost.
Everywhere they were defeated by ruling classes, with their states and
armies. And this of course is where we still are. Shouldn’t we be
pondering this? Shouldn’t we be questioning this, this pattern of
insurrection, whereby we pour into the streets in marches and
demonstrations, patching together as best we can from the depths of a
crisis, sort of spontaneously, institutions of self-governance, only to
find ourselves scattered, disbanded, arrested, smashed, or murdered by
superior forces? Shouldn’t we be rearranging ourselves socially on a
permanent basis in order to accumulate the power and resources needed to
defeat our oppressors?

The street demonstrations in Eastern Europe in 1989, while toppling
governments, did not result in democracy, but only in the coming to
power of a mafia capitalism. The tremendous demonstrations last month in
Yugoslavia, wherein thousands poured into Belgrade from all over the
country, did not bring into being a more direct democracy, but only
resulted in the victory of neoliberalism. (Apparently, although the
marches were genuine, the actual seizing of the parliament building and
the radio station was done by 2000 trained protesters organized and
funded by the US.) The seizure of workplaces following the downfall of
Milosevic is also complicated. Workers were throwing out their former
managers and taking over plants for themselves, but this apparently was
done in order to weaken the public, socialist elements (these plants
were already worker-managed, but had become bureaucratized and top
down), and to ready the plants for entry into the free market and for
sale to foreign capital. Somehow, ‘workers control’ got transformed into
a force for neo-liberalism.

<strong>Postscript</strong> (January, 2001)

This week (Jan. 25-30) in Davos, Switzerland, radicals are demonstrating
against the World Economic Forum. In addition, an anti-Davos
counter-conference has been organized in [Porto
Alegre](Porto_Alegre "wikilink"), [Brazil](Brazil "wikilink"), called
the [World Social Forum](World_Social_Forum "wikilink"), attended by
thousands of activists. I can’t deny that I find these events very
exciting and encouraging, just as I did the demonstrations and ‘shadow
conferences’ in Seattle, Washington DC, Philadelphia, Los Angeles,
Windsor, Melbourne, Prague, and elsewhere. They are throwing light on
the heretofore secret, unnoticed meetings of the leaders of the world’s
ruling classes. They are breaking the intellectual monopoly that the
ruling classes have enjoyed on many topics, such as ‘development’ and
‘world organization’, and are even advocating ‘localism’ at times. They
are giving notice to these elites that they are not going to be allowed
to continue imposing their self-profiting policies on the world, in
obscurity, and with impunity. They are raising awareness worldwide about
what these elites are up to.

So what’s my beef? Well, it’s one thing to raise consciousness about
something bad, but it’s quite another to actually get rid of it. The WTO
still exists, doesn’t it? It is still working, and planning another
meeting (this time in Qatar!). The World Bank still exists, and the
World Economic Forum, and G7, NAFTA, GATT, and so forth. And the
national governments which support these global organizations still
exist too, don’t they? What happens after the protesters go home? How
will they acquire the power to actually dismantle these national and
global ruling institutions? Even if a ‘sea change’ is achieved in world
consciousness, about what’s wrong, what will happen then? In the absence
of concrete positive programs for local self-rule, what will replace
global capitalism, if not some more-or-less equally bad system? Won’t
reforms most likely lean in the direction of [Social
Democracy](Social_Democracy "wikilink"), at best, or at worst, some new
world governing elite, even if comprised of NGOs (which would
undoubtedly be rapidly co-opted by a reconstituted ruling class)? A few
articles have already appeared, by members of the new generation of
protesters themselves, questioning the effectiveness of ‘summit-hopping’
on a world scale. <em>(g)</em>

The kind of organizing and actions we need to be involved in to actually
get rid of these oppressive institutions is considerably different than
this pattern of mass mobilizations at the centers of power. It’s
undeniable that it’s fantastic that radicals are once again confronting
their rulers, and building a culture of resistance. It’s equally
undeniable that this is not enough. In order to do more than merely
confront them, and instead to actually defeat them, we need a rather
different strategy, one focused on the creation of strategic free
associations (assemblies) in our neighborhoods, workplaces, and
households. This would get us involved in creating the world we want,
and simultaneously put us in a position to gut capitalism, by draining
power, wealth, and meaning out of its institutions, until there is
nothing left of them but shells.

<strong>Notes</strong>

(a). <em>Getting Free</em> is available on the web at:
<http://site.www.umb.edu/faculty/salzman_g/Strategy/GettingFree>.

\(b\) For 1968, see Immanuel Wallerstein, "1968, revolution in the
world-system," pp. 65-83, in his <em>Geopolitics and Geoculture</em>
(Cambridge, 1991).

\(c\) <em>Lockdown America: Police and Prisons in the Age of
Crisis</em>, by Christian Parenti, Verso, 1999.

\(d\) <em>Revolution from Above: The Demise of the Soviet System</em>,
by David Kotz with Fred Weir, Routledge, 1997.

\(e\) See Immanuel Wallerstein, "Globalization or the Age of Transition?
A Long-Term View of the Trajectory of the World-System", available on
the web at <http://fbc.binghamton.edu/iwtrajws.htm>.

\(f\) The last few pages of ch. 5 in my booklet, <em>How Do We Get
There: A Critique of the Question ‘What Do You Do?’</em>, 1973
(unpublished).

\(g\) See for example, Chris Dixon (a founding member of Direct Action
Network), "Finding Hope After Seattle: Rethinking Radical Activism and
Building a Movement". On the web at www.zmag.org/dixonseattle.htm.

## External Links

- [The Weakness of a Politics of
  Protest](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/james-herod-the-weakness-of-a-politics-of-protest)
  at [theanarchistlibrary.org](theanarchistlibrary.org "wikilink")

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink") [Category:James
Herod](Category:James_Herod "wikilink")
[Category:Articles](Category:Articles "wikilink")