---
title: Trinidad and Tobago Water Riots (1903)
permalink: /Trinidad_and_Tobago_Water_Riots_(1903)/
---

The **Trinidad and Tobago Water Riots** was a [nationwide
uprising](List_of_Libertarian_Socialist_Revolutions "wikilink") and
[class war](Class_Struggle "wikilink") over [water](water "wikilink")
use in Port of Spain in the then [British](British_Empire "wikilink")
colony of [Trinidad and
Tobago](Republic_of_Trinidad_and_Tobago "wikilink") in
[1903](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_the_Caribbean "wikilink").

## Background

Port of Spain's bourgeoisie had been known for excessive water waste in
the construction of elaborate fountains and gardens. Engineers in the
1880s observed the over-consumption and recommended expanding the
plumbing network and installing water meters, but this was ignored by
the central government. The concept that water was a [common
resource](Commons "wikilink") to be shared by all and not a [capitalist
commodity](Capitalism "wikilink") became popular among the [lower
classes](Lower_Classes "wikilink"), and efforts to restrict public
participation in debate led to a riot.[^1]

## Events

The Parliament (The Red House) was attacked with stones and bottles,
windows were smashed and people stormed the parliament, forcing
politicians to hide under tables. Police,the army and the navy were all
deployed to land soldiers. Police massacred 16 protesters and injured 42
(including two teenagers and a child). As protesters stormed the
parliament, it was burned down to the ground.

## Results

The riot led to the reinstatement of a [local democratic
council](Democratic_Assembly "wikilink") to manage water affairs.[^2]

## References

<references />

[Category:1903](Category:1903 "wikilink")
[Category:1900s](Category:1900s "wikilink") [Category:Trinidad and
Tobago](Category:Trinidad_and_Tobago "wikilink")
[Category:Caribbean](Category:Caribbean "wikilink") [Category:Water
Uprisings](Category:Water_Uprisings "wikilink")
[Category:Uprisings](Category:Uprisings "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Libertarian
Socialism](Category:Libertarian_Socialism "wikilink")

[^1]: <https://blog.nationalarchives.gov.uk/blog/the-trinidad-water-riots-of-1903/>

[^2]: <https://blog.nationalarchives.gov.uk/blog/the-trinidad-water-riots-of-1903/>