---
title: Uruguayan General Strike (1984)
permalink: /Uruguayan_General_Strike_(1984)/
---

The **Uruguayan General Strike of 1984** was a [general
strike](List_of_General_Strikes.md "wikilink") in
[Uruguay](Uruguay.md "wikilink") in
[1984](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_South_America.md "wikilink")
which brought an end to the [dictatorship in the
country](Uruguayan_Dictatorship.md "wikilink") and creation of a [liberal
democracy](Representative_Democracy.md "wikilink").

## Background

Before 1973, Uruguay had been one of few countries in Latin America with
a near perfect record of political stability and a strong democracy
(others included [Chile](Chile.md "wikilink") and [Costa
Rica](Costa_Rica.md "wikilink")). The military coup in 1973 came as a
profound shock to Uruguay. To make matters worse, this once peaceful
nation was now living under a regime that used fear, threat, and
intimidation to keep control of its populace. Many people were arrested
and jailed as political prisoners, people “disappeared” or were
tortured, political parties were banned, parliament closed, trade unions
repressed, wealth concentrated in the hand of an elite (alongside a
severe economic crisis that hurt the working class), and the media
censored.

In 1980, the government tried and failed to have a referendum to
legitimise their regime. Then the government allowed several [May
Day](May_Day.md "wikilink") rallies to be held (although some believed it
was a ploy to strike fear around the left) which backfired. Soon, a
general strike began to be organised over anger of the severe
[stagflation](stagflation.md "wikilink") in the country (51%
[inflation](inflation.md "wikilink") and 15%
[unemployment](unemployment.md "wikilink")) and a demand for wage
increases, greater union rights, freedom of political prisoners and
democracy.

## Events

### First Strike

The first strike was held on the 18th of January, 1984 and lasted a full
day, paralysing the country, however, it did not see a crackdown.

Less than two months, another strike was organised, 90% of people did
not attend work and many others who did began occupations of their
workplace. The government responded with riot police to block the
occupations and banned all media coverage. However, some magazines
covered the story anyway (but were quickly shut down). The government
ordered public transportation to resume, but only empty buses drove
through the streets with signs in the windows reading, “obligatory
emergency service.”

### Third Strike

On the 27th of June, the 11th anniversary of the military coup, the
opposition parties organized one final strike that shut down the
country.

## Results

The strike led to the fall of Uruguay's dictatorship and the subsequent
freeing of all political prisoners, legalisation of trade unions and
political parties, free press, increases in workers wages and the
creation of one of the most progressive countries in the world.

## References

<http://libcom.org/history/1984-uruguay-general-strike>

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki.md "wikilink")
[Category:Uruguay](Category:Uruguay.md "wikilink") [Category:South
America](Category:South_America.md "wikilink")
[Category:1984](Category:1984.md "wikilink")
[Category:1980s](Category:1980s.md "wikilink") [Category:20th
Century](Category:20th_Century.md "wikilink") [Category:General
Strikes](Category:General_Strikes.md "wikilink")