---
title: Vladimir Lenin
permalink: /Vladimir_Lenin/
---

**Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov**(better known by his alias **Lenin**) was a
revolutionary, politician and political theorist. He helped organise the
October Revolution in Russia in 1917, ending the Provisional Government,
developing the ideas of Leninism and was the leader of the early USSR.

Widely considered one of the most significant and influential figures of
the 20th century, Lenin was the posthumous subject of a pervasive
personality cult within the Soviet Union until its dissolution in 1991.
He became an ideological figurehead behind Marxismâ€“Leninism and thus a
prominent influence over the international communist movement. A
controversial and highly divisive historical figure, Lenin is viewed by
supporters as a champion of socialism and the working class, while
critics on both the left and right emphasize his role as founder and
leader of an authoritarian regime responsible for political repression
and mass killings.

[Category:Characters](Category:Characters "wikilink")
[Category:Leninists](Category:Leninists "wikilink")
[Category:Communists](Category:Communists "wikilink")
[Category:Marxists](Category:Marxists "wikilink") [Category:Libertarian
Socialist Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Russia](Category:Russia "wikilink")
[Category:USSR](Category:USSR "wikilink")