---
title: White Terror (Spain)
permalink: /White_Terror_(Spain)/
---

*Not to be confused with the White Terrors in
[France](White_Terror_(France) "wikilink"),
[Bulgaria](White_Terror_(Bulgaria) "wikilink"),
[Russia](White_Terror_(Russia) "wikilink"),
[Hungary](White_Terror_(Hungary) "wikilink"),
[China](White_Terror_(China) "wikilink"),
[Taiwan](White_Terror_(Taiwan) "wikilink"),
[Finland](White_Terror_(Finland) "wikilink") and
[Greece](White_Terror_(Greece) "wikilink").*

*Content Warning: This article contains extensive discussion of mass
murder, rape and child abuse*

The **White Terror** or **Francoist Repression** was a [white
terror](White_Terror "wikilink") by the Nationalist Faction in the
[Spanish Civil War](Spanish_Civil_War "wikilink") and the [dictatorship
in Spain](Franco_Dictatorship "wikilink") against political opponents.
Including republicans, [anti-fascists](Anti-Fascism "wikilink"),
socialists, [anarchists](Anarchism "wikilink"), protestants, freemasons,
intellectuals, and nationalists who supported an independent Galicia,
Catalonia and Basque Country. Between 58,000 and 200,000 were killed
during the repression. It is frequently compared to and contrasted with
the [Spanish Red Terror](Red_Terror_(Spain) "wikilink"), which as death
estimates of between 38,000 to 115,000 people.

## During the War

## After the War

When Heinrich Himmler (the main architect of the
[Holocaust](Holocaust "wikilink")) visited Spain in 1940, a year after
Franco's victory, he claimed to have been "shocked" by the brutality of
the Falangist repression. In July 1939, the foreign minister of Fascist
Italy, Galeazzo Ciano, reported of "trials going on every day at a speed
which I would call almost summary... There are still a great number of .
In Madrid alone, between 200 and 250 a day, in Barcelona 150, in Seville
80".

### Anti-Feminism

Women's and LGBT rights were lost in the new regime as
[patriarchy](patriarchy "wikilink") was violently enforced. Around 5,000
gay people were arrested and executed in concentration camps. Divorces
were made illegal and divorced couples were forced by the state to
remarry. Women now needed the permission of their husbands to take a job
or open a bank account.

Women were legally classified as minors who were under the guardianship
of their husbands, with no legal authority over their children nor equal
rights to joint property. Women were imprisoned for committing adultery;
by contrast, men who committed the same offence were not jailed.

In addition, honor hillings were legalized, where it was legal for the
head of the household to kill his wife or daughter if he felt that she
had "dishonored" him or the family name.

Women who opposed the regime faced brutal repression, being paraded
naked through the streets, being shaved and forced to ingest castor oil
so they would urinate themselves in public. Sexual harassment and rape
of dissident women was performed by police and soldiers. In many cases,
the houses and possessions of widows of republicans were confiscated by
the government, forcing many into prostitution just to survive, leading
to:

> "The increase in prostitution both benefited Francoist men who thereby
> slaked their lust and also reassured them that 'red' women were a
> fount of dirt and corruption".

### Censorship

Books, poetry, songs, plastic arts, film and theater that were critical
of the regime were all banned and anyone caught distributing it would be
arrested. Several schools of art, writing and music were banned as they
were seen as too close to communism.

### Concentration Camps

Spain had approximately 367,000 to 500,000 prisoners who were held in 50
concentration camps or prisons. In 1933, before the war, the prisons of
Spain contained some 12,000 prisoners, just seven years later, in 1940,
just one year after the end of the civil war, 280,000 prisoners were
held in more than 500 prisons throughout the country. Often holding poor
sanitary conditions and a lack of food, causing thousands of death, with
15,000 dying alone in 1941. Many prisoners were enslaved to build damns,
highways, coal mines, prisons and canals.

In addition, horrific medical experiments were carried out in these
camps by Antonio Vallejo-Nájera, who wished to "establish the bio-psych
roots of Marxism", proposing a link between belief in leftism and
"mental retardation". Vallejo Najera also said that it was necessary to
remove the children of the Republican women from their mothers.
Thousands of children were taken from their mothers and handed over to
Francoist families. Many of the mothers were executed afterwards.

### Purges

The Francoist Dictatorship carried out extensive purges among the civil
service. Thousands of officials loyal to the Republic were expelled from
the army. Thousands of university and school teachers lost their jobs (a
quarter of all Spanish teachers). Priority for employment was always
given to Nationalist supporters, and it was necessary to have a "good
behavior" certificate from local Falangist officials and parish priests.
Furthermore, the Francoist Dictatorship encouraged tens of thousands of
Spaniards to denounce their Republican neighbours and friends.

### Repression

Julián Casanova Ruiz, nominated in 2008 among the experts in the first
judicial investigation (conducted by judge Baltasar Garzón) against the
Francoist crimes estimate 50,000 dissidents. were executed under the
dictatorship. Political parties and trade unions were forbidden except
for the government party. Hundreds of militants and supporters of the
parties and trade unions declared illegal under Francoist Spain, such as
the [Spanish Socialist Workers'
Party](Spanish_Socialist_Workers'_Party "wikilink"), [Communist Party of
Spain](Communist_Party_of_Spain "wikilink"), [Workers' General
Union](Workers'_General_Union_(Spain) "wikilink") and the [National
Confederation of
Labour](National_Confederation_of_Labour_(Spain) "wikilink") were
imprisoned or executed. Other Iberian languages, including but not
limited to Basque, Catalan, Galician, Asturleonese and Aragonese had
their public use forbidden, and the statutes of autonomy of Catalonia
and the Basque Country were abolished.

## References

[Wikipedia](Wikipedia "wikilink") - [White Terror
(Spain)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/White_Terror_(Spain))

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink") [Category:White
Terrors](Category:White_Terrors "wikilink")
[Category:Spain](Category:Spain "wikilink")
[Category:Europe](Category:Europe "wikilink") [Category:Southern
Europe](Category:Southern_Europe "wikilink") [Category:20th
Century](Category:20th_Century "wikilink") [Category:Crimes Against
Humanity](Category:Crimes_Against_Humanity "wikilink")
[Category:1930s](Category:1930s "wikilink")
[Category:1940s](Category:1940s "wikilink")
[Category:1950s](Category:1950s "wikilink")
[Category:1960s](Category:1960s "wikilink")
[Category:1970s](Category:1970s "wikilink")