---
title: Wukan Land Defense (2011)
permalink: /Wukan_Land_Defense_(2011)/
---

The **Wukan protests**, also known as the **Siege of Wukan**, was an
anti-corruption protest that began in September 2011, and escalated in
December 2011 with the expulsion of officials by villagers, the siege of
the town by police, and subsequent détente<sup>\[5\]</sup> in the
southern Chinese village of Wukan (pop. 12,000). The villagers rose up
again in June 2016, but were again suppressed.<sup>\[6\]</sup> The most
recent rounds of clashes were in September, 2016, when the former
village leader Lin Zulian was sentenced to jail. The clashes were
suppressed.

The protests began on 21–23 September 2011 after officials sold land to
real estate developers without properly compensating the villagers.
Several hundred to several thousand people protested in front of and
then attacked a government building, a police station and an industrial
park. Protesters held signs saying "give us back our farmland" and "let
us continue farming." Rumors that the police had killed a child further
inflamed the protesters and provoked rioting. Residents of Wukan had
previously petitioned the national government in 2009 and 2010 over the
land disputes. In an apparent attempt to ease tensions, authorities
allowed villagers to select 13 representatives to engage in
negotiations.

Security agents abducted five of the representatives and took them into
custody in early December. The protests strengthened after one of the
village representatives, Xue Jinbo, died in police custody in suspicious
circumstances.<sup>\[3\]\[4\]</sup> The villagers forced the entire
local government, Communist Party leadership and police out of the
village.<sup>\[7\]</sup> As of 14 December 2011, a thousand police laid
siege to the village, preventing food and goods from entering the
village.<sup>\[5\]\[8\]</sup> Government authorities set up internet
censorship against information about Wukan, Lufeng and
Shanwei.<sup>\[9\]</sup>

Wukan is a village that had often been described as being especially
harmonious.<sup>\[10\]</sup> International newspapers described the
December uprising as being exceptional<sup>\[5\]\[7\]\[11\]\[12\]</sup>
compared to other "mass incidents" in the People's Republic of China
which numbered approximately 180,000 in 2010.<sup>\[13\]</sup>

The village representatives and provincial officials reached a peaceful
agreement, satisfying the villagers' immediate
requests.<sup>\[14\]</sup> Local Communist Party secretary of Shanwei
City said that the authority of the city has been "overridden" by
provincial intervention.<sup>\[15\]</sup>

## Contents

- 1 Background
  - 1.1 Grievances
- 2 September mobilisation
  - 2.1 Land grab and resolution
- 3 December uprising
  - 3.1 Death of Xue Jinbo
  - 3.2 Uprising and siege
  - 3.3 News coverage
    - 3.3.1 International media commentary
- 4 2012 election
- 5 Impact
  - 5.1 On similar village protests
  - 5.2 On Communist Party politics
- 6 Protests in 2016
- 7 People
- 8 See also
- 9 References
- 10 External links

## Background

Wukan village (population 20,000) is located in Lufeng county-level city
of Guangdong province, some 5 km south (22°53′N
115°40′E)<sup>\[16\]</sup> of Lufeng's central urban area. The village
is near the shore of the Wukan Harbor (乌坎港), which is part of the
Jieshi Bay (碣石湾) of the South China Sea;<sup>\[17\]</sup> the
location of the village near the southern Chinese coast lends itself
well to urban development.<sup>\[18\]</sup> The village has enjoyed the
reputation on the mainland for many years as a model village for its
harmoniousness, civility and prosperity.<sup>\[10\]</sup>

Since the abolition of agricultural taxes in 2006, local government has
been increasingly raising money through land sales to the extent that
this is now a primary revenue stream.<sup>\[19\]</sup> Conflicts between
farmers and local officials have risen throughout China, often because
of land seizures (or "land grabs").<sup>\[19\]</sup> The rate of forced
evictions has grown significantly since the 1990s, as city and
county-level governments have increasingly come to rely on land sales as
a source of revenue. In 2011, the Financial Times reported that 40
percent of local government revenue comes from land
sales.<sup>\[20\]</sup> Guan Qingyou, a professor at Tsinghua
University, estimated that land sales accounted for 74 percent of local
government income in 2010.<sup>\[21\]</sup> According to the Chinese
Academy of Sciences, by the end of 2011 there was a total of 50 million
displaced farmers across China (from all preceding years), and an
average of 3 million farmers are displaced across China per
year.<sup>\[22\]</sup> In most instances, the land is then sold to
private developers at an average cost of 40 times higher per acre than
the government paid to the villagers.<sup>\[23\]</sup>

There are more than 90,000 civil disturbances in China each
year,<sup>\[24\]</sup> and an estimated 180,000 mass protests occurred
in the country in 2010;<sup>\[25\]</sup> grievances are often corruption
or illegal land seizures. The Jamestown Foundation offers a macroscopic
explanation for the rise in conflicts: that local officials, caught
between local government revenue shortfalls due to measures by central
government to cool the overheated property market and their personal
ratings based on their contributions to GDP growth, have resorted to
undercompensating villagers for land appropriations.<sup>\[26\]</sup>

Farmland in Lufeng city has been progressively giving way to new
developments. Projects in recent years have included a palatial new
government building and a sumptuous holiday hotel resort that contained
a row of 60 luxury villas. A glitzy new "Golden Sands" nightclub is a
new attraction that brings rich visitors from out of
town.<sup>\[19\]</sup> In 2011, villagers alleged local officials had
grabbed hundreds of hectares of cooperative land and were "secretly
selling" it to a real estate developer.<sup>\[10\]</sup> According to a
news analysis in *The New York Times*, China's village committees are
elected by the villagers themselves, and are thus theoretically the most
representative forms of governance, yet most residents are unfamiliar
with how the village system functions, and are unaware of their rights.
The sale of collectivised land is supposed to require approval of the
villagers under Chinese law, and the proceeds are supposed to be shared.
However, the approval process lacks transparency in practice, and most
decisions are taken by the elected village committee with the blessing
of the Donghai township – the level of government just above Wukan. The
residents of Wukan made allegations of corruption: five of the nine
members of Wukan's village committee had held their posts since the
creation of the committee system by Deng Xiaoping, and the village's
Communist Party secretary, Xue Chang, has been in the position since
1970.<sup>\[18\]</sup>

### Grievances

Residents in several villages near Wukan alleged that village officials
had confiscated their farm land and sold it to
developers.<sup>\[10\]\[27\]</sup> The livelihoods of many were at
stake: many were facing severe hardship with no land to till, and had
difficulty buying food on their meagre urban incomes.<sup>\[10\]</sup>
Wukan villagers said that they were unaware of the sale until developers
began construction work, and alleged that local Communist Party
officials had profited from the sale of communal land, selling it for
\$1 billion RMB (US\$156 million) to Country Garden.<sup>\[2\]</sup>
Villagers asserted that 400 hectares of farmland had been appropriated
without compensation since 1998.<sup>\[28\]</sup> The villagers
petitioned various levels of government in vain over the years, accused
local cadres of "pocketing more than 700 million yuan"
(US\$110 million), which should legally have gone to compensating local
farmers, since 2006. Local officials blamed the villagers' concerns on
"troublemakers" who were manipulating those who were "unaware of the
truth".<sup>\[10\]</sup>

## September mobilisation

On the morning of 21 September 2011, hundreds of villagers participated
in a sit-in protest against local officials outside government offices
in Lufeng.<sup>\[24\]</sup> According to official statements, initially
about 50 people shouting slogans and holding banners protested
peacefully.<sup>\[29\]</sup> Protesters hoisted banners and carried
placards with slogans like "give us back our farmland" and "let us
continue farming".<sup>\[30\]</sup> Then as the crowd grew in numbers,
protesters became restless and started damaging buildings and equipment
in an industrial park in the village and blocking
roads.<sup>\[29\]</sup> Policemen were dispatched, and one villager said
that they severely beat some teenagers who were banging on a gong to
alert fellow villagers of the protest.<sup>\[10\]</sup> Three villagers
were arrested during the first day's violence. The next day, the police
station was besieged by more than 100 villagers demanding the release of
the detained villagers, and the violence escalated.<sup>\[29\]</sup>

The news that several youngsters had been seriously injured after being
set upon by 'thugs' caused hundreds of irate villagers armed with
makeshift weapons to besiege a local police station, where 30 to 40
officials were sheltering. Hundreds of well-equipped riot police were
dispatched, and they engaged in a stand-off with the farmers. Video
footage shot by villagers in Wukan showed people of all ages being
chased and beaten with truncheons by riot police.<sup>\[10\]</sup> One
Wukan villager described the police and other security staff as "like
mad dogs, beating everyone they saw".<sup>\[19\]</sup> The *Financial
Times* reported that two children, aged nine and 13, were "badly
injured", and that one may have died.<sup>\[2\]</sup> Some villagers
said that elderly people and children protesting peacefully were
harassed and assaulted by "hired thugs", provoking an angry reaction
from other villagers. The attacks on civilians by 400 police officers
were described by the *Financial Times* as
"indiscriminate".<sup>\[2\]</sup>

One of the 'hired guns' bragged that he had been brought in by an
influential businessman, who paid him RMB3,000 and promised him immunity
from reprisals for any assaults.<sup>\[2\]</sup> Officials blamed the
escalating violence on "rumours" that police officers had beat a child
to death. The official statement denied that any civilians had
died.<sup>\[24\]</sup> Internet news of the riots, including photos and
videos, were quickly deleted by CCP censors.<sup>\[31\]</sup> Press
reported that searches on Sina Weibo (a microblog) for terms linked to
Lufeng were blocked a short time after the protests
began.<sup>\[10\]</sup>

On the third day of unrest, the municipality of Shanwei, which has the
responsibility for Lufeng, issued a statement saying that "hundreds of
villagers attacked government buildings". It said "more than a dozen
police officers had been injured and '6 police vehicles had suffered
damage'".<sup>\[24\]</sup> In what appeared to analysts as a change of
tactics, observers noted that the authorities withdrew visible police
presence for several days instead of stepping up police presence and
suppressing the protesters more forcefully. Guangdong party chief Wang
Yang also reassured residents by declaring that he was prepared to
accept lower economic growth in Guangdong in exchange for increased
harmony within the province.<sup>\[19\]</sup> Jean Pierre Cabestan, a
politics professor at Hong Kong Baptist University, suspected that the
policing change was due to the political aspirations of Wang, who wants
to "survive and protect his image until next year". Wang, a
strongly-touted candidate for the politburo when the Hu / Wen generation
retires, had been projecting a "Happy Guangdong" model of development to
level the wealth gap and emphasise social harmony. Police only returned
on the fourth day after the riots.<sup>\[19\]</sup>

### Land grab and resolution

Addressing the land dispute underlying the unrest, a senior official
admitted that a sale of the land was planned, and interested property
developers had already surveyed the site with local officials, but
officials said that no contract had yet been signed.<sup>\[10\]</sup>
Guangdong media published reports that suggested protesters acted as
mobs that assaulted and injured dozens of riot policemen. Villagers
accused the press of blatant bias.<sup>\[10\]</sup>

The Shanwei city government offered to appoint an inter-agency committee
to delve into the land seizure allegations in exchange for an immediate
end to the protests.<sup>\[32\]</sup> Officials also said they would
consider a fresh village election for clean and fair representatives to
take part in future land negotiations. Because the government had agreed
to deal with the issue openly and fairly, the villagers temporarily
suspended their protests.<sup>\[19\]</sup>

## December uprising

Funeral procession of Xue Jinbo, Wukan village representative.

The local government agreed to negotiate with thirteen democratically
elected officials from Wukan; but, before the negotiations could settle
any of the villagers' disputes, three of the representatives were
arrested. One of the representatives, Xue Jinbo (薛錦波) died in police
custody under mysterious circumstances.<sup>\[22\]</sup> After news of
Xue's death became widely known, the villagers forcefully evicted local
Communist Party officials and police from the village, leading to a
blockade of the village by police.<sup>\[7\]</sup>

### Death of Xue Jinbo

Xue Jinbo was arrested by plainclothes police without a warrant in front
of a restaurant just before noon (local time) on 9 December 2011. He was
taken away in a minibus without licence plates.<sup>\[3\]</sup> Four
other village representatives were also detained on 9 December 2011.

At 11 pm in the evening of 11 December, a Lufeng City official, Huang,
called Xue's daughter asking about Xue's full medical history, stating
that Xue had been admitted to hospital in critical
condition.<sup>\[3\]</sup> Xue's daughter and wife went to the hospital
at Shanwei in the following few hours, and were made to wait without
having access to Xue. Officials told the Xue family that Xue Jinbo had
arrived at a local prison at 7 am on 10 December and died at 10 am on 11
December. Other family members were contacted and arrived in Shanwei.
Ten family members, including Xue's daughter and wife, were permitted to
see Xue's body, but were prevented by police from using cameras and
telephones.

The local police alleged that Xue had died suddenly of a heart attack
after he had confessed to damaging property and disrupting public
services, but his friends and family rejected this explanation, and
believed that Xue had died after being subjected to police
brutality.<sup>\[22\]</sup> According to Xue's relatives, Xue's body
showed signs of torture:<sup>\[33\]</sup> it was covered in bruises and
cuts, both his nostrils were caked with blood, his thumbs were bent and
twisted backwards. His daughter said her father had "a large bruise on
his back suggested he had been kicked from behind."<sup>\[3\]</sup>
Xue's son-in-law Gao also noted that Xue's knees were bruised. Because
Xue's clothes were clean, his family suggested that he had been stripped
and then tortured.<sup>\[11\]</sup> Xue's family refused official
requests for an autopsy to be carried out.<sup>\[34\]</sup>

China News Service reported on 14 December that Xue's family members
agreed with medical examiners' verdict that Xue died of "sudden cardiac
failure".<sup>\[26\]</sup> Xinhua News stated that he had a history of
asthma and heart disease that forensic investigators had found no
evidence of abuse, and that Xue died of cardiac arrest at age 42 /
43.<sup>\[11\]</sup> Xue's eldest daughter, Xue Jianwan, categorically
denied to a Hong Kong online journal, *iSun Affairs*, that her father
had a history of heart problems.<sup>\[4\]</sup> Villagers held a
two-hour vigil for him at his home.<sup>\[35\]</sup> Two post-mortem
examinations were carried out: the first was undertaken by the Shanwei
public security department, after which the family was informed that Xue
had died of "sudden cardiac death". Following the family's protests, the
authorities consented to a second autopsy, which was carried out by the
medical examiner from Zhongshan University, Guangzhou. At no stage were
any relatives present. The family said that the short written autopsy
report given to them failed to address their queries.<sup>\[36\]</sup>

### Uprising and siege

Villagers began holding daily protest meetings starting on 12
December.<sup>\[5\]</sup> Throughout mid-December the villagers
protested against the local government, waiting for the intervention of
the central government and hoping that the central government would
conduct an investigation.<sup>\[37\]\[38\]</sup>

After the news of Xue's death became widely known in Wukan on December
14, residents stormed the local police station and clashed with police,
forcing them and local Communist Party officials out of the
village.<sup>\[7\]</sup> After evacuating, the police cordoned off the
area around the village and blocked the roads leading to
it.<sup>\[8\]</sup> The government dispatched a force of 1000 armed
officers to maintain order, but it was unsuccessful in retaking control
of the village.<sup>\[5\]</sup> The authorities held the village in
siege, preventing supplies from entering.<sup>\[39\]</sup>

Local Communist Party officials accused the Wukan village
representatives of being ringleaders of the protests. County-level
official Wu Zili accused village representatives Lin Zuluan and Yang
Semao of organizing and inciting the villagers to set up barricades
around the village since 8 December (a day before Xue Jinbo was
arrested): "They did this to prevent officials from entering the village
and to stop the perpetrators of the earlier riots from leaving the
village and turning themselves into the authorities."<sup>\[40\]</sup>

On 16 December, provincial Chinese officials "vowed to temporarily halt
questionable property sales and to investigate claims that the local
government illegally confiscated farmland for private development",
according to official news media,<sup>\[39\]</sup> but he police refused
to release the body of Xue Jinbo to his family in order to have it
buried.<sup>\[22\]</sup> The same day, about 7000 people gathered for a
ceremony for Xue Jinbo, and the standoff between villagers and
authorities continued, with checkpoints from both sides set up around
the village. Xue's son, Xue Jiandi, stated: "Right now we have only one
demand, and that is that they return the body of my father, he belongs
to us, not to the government."<sup>\[41\]</sup>

Protesters continued to demonstrate while displaying banners pledging
loyalty to the Communist Party.<sup>\[37\]</sup> A villager reported
that the government had offered rice and cooking oil – both of which
were in low supply due to the blockade – to villagers who switch sides
from the protesters and over to the government. The government gained at
least a hundred supporters from the effort, but the stall was later shut
down.<sup>\[35\]</sup>

On 18 December, Lin Zuluan, one of Wukan's representatives, said that
"leaders at a higher level of local government summoned \[him\] for
talks" and that they wished to go to the village. Lin Zuluan refused the
proposal, saying that there could be no talks until Xue's body was
released, the four other village representatives held by police were
released, and the villagers' land was returned.<sup>\[42\]</sup> During
the siege the villagers administered Wukan, as of 18 December 2011, from
a temple to the goddess of the sea, Mazu.<sup>\[42\]</sup>

A breakthrough occurred on 20 December when senior provincial officials
intervened in the dispute and acknowledged villagers' basic demands. The
officials admitted to mistakes in handling the grievances and vowed to
crack down on corruption.<sup>\[43\]</sup> On 21 December, after 3 tense
days, the village representatives and government representatives reached
a peaceful agreement for the villagers to stand down and cancel their
march. In return, Xue's corpse would be released, and those detained by
police would go free.<sup>\[44\]\[45\]</sup> The provincial government
also agreed to make the village's financial records public, to dismiss
and investigate two local officials identified by villagers as
responsible for the incident,<sup>\[22\]</sup> to address flaws in
electing local officials, and to redistribute land which had been
confiscated by the local government.<sup>\[46\]</sup>

### News coverage

A survey conducted on 19 December by the Journalism and Media Studies
Centre at the University of Hong Kong indicates strong coverage outside
mainland China, but none of the 200+ newspapers inside the country
published any articles. The story was extensively covered in *Ming Pao*
and *Apple Daily* in Hong Kong; abroad, articles were published by the
*Financial Times*, Reuters, *The New York Times*, *The Wall Street
Journal* and others. 58 articles were surveyed across the region in
total, of which 37 were from Hong Kong, 6 from Taiwan, 14 from Malaysia
and 1 from Singapore.<sup>\[47\]</sup>

Some Sina Weibo microbloggers told the BBC that internet searches
related to Wukan and the area were blocked after the December uprising
started, and villagers' microblogs were deleted. Web users reacted by
using alternative terms to refer to the events.<sup>\[9\]</sup>

In an undated video circulated to the national media, Zheng Yanxiong
blamed the media for his woes in front of a group of local officials and
village representatives, saying that cadres like him were the only ones
facing increasing hardship every year: "Our powers decline every day,
and fewer and fewer methods are at our disposal. But responsibility
becomes bigger and bigger ... Ordinary people have bigger and bigger
appetites, and become smarter every day. They are harder and harder to
control." This attitude was lampooned in an opinion piece in *The
Standard*.<sup>\[48\]</sup>

Xinhua and various state media, which had previously hardly reported the
dispute, started publishing articles on 22 December that praised the
provincial government for its handling of the event.<sup>\[46\]</sup> In
a *Global Times* article, a public policy professor at Renmin University
praised the provincial government's "evenhanded resolution" of the
issue. He said: "The intervention is hard-earned progress, which
rebutted previous claims by local authorities that the villagers had
organized the protests 'out of malicious attempts'." Lin Zhe, professor
at the Party School of the Party Central Committee, criticised local
officials for having "poor sense of law and long-term neglect of the
public's rights and interests," and said that the escalation of the
dispute into violence would not have occurred if local authorities had
"properly studied the complaints at the initial
stages."<sup>\[43\]</sup>

#### International media commentary

During the protests, media including the BBC and the New York Times
described the protests as "larger",<sup>\[8\]</sup> "unusual for their
longevity",<sup>\[11\]</sup> and "a likely first in China's modern
history".<sup>\[7\]</sup> *The Wall Street Journal* declared the
protests "\[2011's\] most serious case of mass unrest in
China".<sup>\[12\]</sup> However, after the protests' peaceful
resolution, *The Atlantic* concluded that they were "not as unusual as
it might have seemed" in the context of China's many small land and
labor disputes, describing as "typical" the protestors' pledges of
loyalty to the Communist Party of China.<sup>\[49\]</sup> Al Jazeera
English has produced a four-part observational documentary series about
Wukan's transition to democracy.<sup>\[50\]</sup>

## 2012 election

Main article: 2012 Wukan municipal election

2012 election

Following the standoff in December, protest leader Lin Zuluan was named
the new Communist Party secretary of Wukan. As part of the truce with
authorities, the governor of Guangdong, Wang Yang, acquiesced to a
village election in Wukan: the first of its kind to employ a secret
ballot.<sup>\[51\]</sup> A series of three elections was planned, which
would select 100 representatives to oversee the village's governing
committee.<sup>\[51\]</sup>

During the first round of elections on 1 February, some 6,000 Wukan
villagers voted for an independent committee to supervise elections for
a new village leadership.<sup>\[52\]</sup> On 11 February, over 6,500
villagers (85% of the population)<sup>\[51\]</sup> voted to elect 107
village representatives, with protester leader Lin Zuluan as village
Party chief replacing the ousted leader, who had held the position for
42 years. The young Xue Jianwan, the daughter of the deceased protesters
leader, Xue Jinbo, was also elected.<sup>\[53\]</sup> According to *WSJ*
writer Josh Chin, the election appeared to be "free of the Communist
Party meddling that typically mars Chinese election
results."<sup>\[54\]</sup>

## Impact

### On similar village protests

Several other villages in China have drawn inspiration from the Wukan
protests.

- In December 2011 residents of the nearby town of Haimen,

Guangdong, staged large-scale protests over plans to expand a coal-fired
power plant. The protests, which drew thousands of participants, were
met with detentions and tear gassing by authorities.<sup>\[55\]</sup>

`Haimen residents told Reuters that they had followed developments in `

Wukan closely, regarding it as a good model of how citizens might
negotiate with authorities.<sup>\[56\]</sup>

- On 17 January 2012 about 1,000 villagers from Baiyun district

held a rally in front of Guangzhou city's government headquarters,
angered by land seizures and corruption. The villagers threatened to
turn the district into a "second Wukan" if their grievances were not
resolved. Protesters said that Party secretary Li Zhihang had pocketed
more than 400 million yuan and had embezzled up to 850,000 yuan from
village operatives.<sup>\[57\]</sup>

- In February 2012 residents of East and West Panhe villages in Zhejiang

staged protests against local officials over forced land requisitions
with inadequate compensation. During a series of earlier protests in
October 2011, police and government authorities reportedly fled the
village.<sup>\[58\]</sup>

### On Communist Party politics

Observers have credited the peaceful resolution of the Wukan protests to
the intervention of the Communist Party chief in Guangdong, Wang Yang.
By demonstrating his ability to resolve the issue peacefully, Wang has
improved his reputation within the Party as a peacemaker who listens and
responds to the interests of the people that he serves.<sup>\[22\]</sup>

The citizens of Wukan welcomed intervention by Wang's government, and
Wang has capitalized on the popularity of his approach since late
December 2011. In a meeting with the Guangdong Party congress in January
2012, Wang pledged to use his "Wukan approach" to improve village
politics throughout the province. Wang, commenting on his resolution of
the protests, has stated that it "was not only meant to solve problems
in the village, but also to set a reference standard to reform village
governance across Guangdong."<sup>\[22\]</sup>

## Protests in 2016

Villagers began marching in protest daily since mid-June 2016 after the
arrest of protest leader Lin Zulian (formerly known as Lin Zuluan), an
elected leader of the village. Lin, 72, had written a letter to the
village on March 2 complaining of continued corruption. Seized land had
been "raped by power, money, and gangsters," he wrote. This protest
letter followed multiple attempts to gain redress from direct contact
with the developer, Hua Hui Real Estate, that had acquired a 110,000
square meter plot of land in Wukan without the approval of the village
committee. The company gave a perfunctory response, and the Lufeng
government, in which Wukan resides, later stated that the land did not
belong to the villagers. On June 18, after calls for "renewed mass
protests" over land seizures, Lin was arrested by special police who
broke into his walled house in the middle of the night.<sup>\[59\]</sup>

In an enquiry about the land deal and treatment of Lin, the Lufeng
government said that it "has not discovered any situation of unfair
suppression or punishment."<sup>\[59\]</sup>

Lin later appeared on state TV admitting that he had taken bribes for
government contracts. This sparked protests, with thousands marching
accusing the government of forcing the confession.<sup>\[60\]</sup>

Attempts by Lin and other village leaders to gain legal representation
have been met with resistance by the authorities. Lin's family
reportedly hired the civil rights lawyer Ge Yongxi, including a retainer
fee. The judicial authorities later made them return the funds, however.
"The firm was banned from accepting any client from Wukan village, which
obviously interferes with our normal, legal business... He should not be
denied the right of legal counsel, whether he has taken any bribe or
not," Ge told South China Morning Post.<sup>\[61\]</sup>

On September 13, new reports emerged that riot police had again
repressed Wukan protesters.<sup>\[62\]</sup>

At the end of December 2016 a Chinese court sentenced nine of the
villagers to prison terms between two and ten years for illegal
assembly, blocking traffic and disrupting public order.<sup>\[63\]</sup>

###

## See Also

- [Cherán Revolution](Cherán_Revolution.md "wikilink") - a similar event in
  Mexico that happened 5 months earlier.
- [Resistance in China](Resistance_in_China.md "wikilink")