---
title: Xapuri Forest Campaign
permalink: /Xapuri_Forest_Campaign/
---

The **Xapuri Forest Campaign** was an 11-year long ([1977 -
1988](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_South_America "wikilink"))
effort to organize [environmentalists](Environmentalism "wikilink"),
[trade unionists](Trade_Union "wikilink") and [indigenous
people](Indigenous_People "wikilink") together to defend the Amazon
rainforest around the town of Xapuri, [Brazil](Brazil "wikilink") from
destruction by wealthy ranchers.

## Background

Much of the Amazon Rainforest had been controlled by powerful rubber
barrons for centuries, who had treated much of the population terribly,
working in [slave-like](Slavery "wikilink") conditions. Attempts were
made in the 1960s to unionize these workers, called “rubber tappers;”
however, these attempts failed. But in the 1970s, ranchers from Southern
Brazil began to buy most of the land in order to clear them for land to
graze cattle on. This forcibly evicted the rubber tappers and cut them
off from their main source of income. This led to a successful
establishing of a rubber tappers union in 1975, the president of which
was Wilson Pinheiro and the secretary was [Chico
Mendes](Chico_Mendes "wikilink"), who went to Xapuri to establish a new
branch of the union.[^1]

## Events

Chico helped organize the Xapuri Rural Workers' Union with [Marina
Silva](Marina_Silva "wikilink") in 1977, drawing a link between the
survivial of the forest and the survival of the workers. The goal of the

The primary goal of the organization was to stop ranchers from clear
cutting Xapuri’s forests for grazing land. In his speeches, Mendes drew
a link between survival of the forest and survival of the rubber
tappers, whose means of support was the Brazilian nuts and rubber they
gathered from the forest. 1977 also marked the creation of a weekly
paper called the Varadoura, which was founded to broadcast information
on the deforestation of Acre region. The editor of the newspaper relied
heavily on Chico to give him weekly updates of the campaign, which Chico
used as a recruitment opportunity.

The primary tactic of the campaign, employed from almost the start, was
the use of empates, or “stand offs.” This tactic involved groups of
activists confronting laborers hired to clear the forests and attempting
to convince them to lay down their saws. Empates were overwhelmingly
successful as many of the men hired to clear the forests had been rubber
tappers before the taking of their land. This tactic was not solely
benign however, as it often involved the destruction of the laborers’
camps and possessions, forcing them to return to their homesteads.
Participants in the empates were often beaten and arrested by military
police called on by the ranchers to keep order. The campaigners met this
treatment with non-violence, such as singing hymns. When imprisoned, the
campaigners often numbered too many for the jail’s holding capacity and
thus were soon released. As the campaign evolved so did the empates,
moving to encompass the entire rubber tapper community, men, women, and
children. Women and children would move to the front of the group,
discouraging the Military police from shooting into the crowd.

In 1979 Chico introduced a strategy to establish schools and
cooperatives on the rubber estates. The rational behind this agenda was
that these programs would improve the living conditions on the estates,
which would in turn give rubber tappers more incentive to organize to
keep their lands and remain in the forest. Originally engineered for
adults, the education program quickly expanded to children. Classes
included literacy training as well as global and environmental
awareness. Although the Mendes’ schools were a huge success, the attempt
to establish cooperatives on the estates failed. Mendes tried to
compensate for this by spending almost all of his time journeying from
estate to estate spreading information and recruiting. 1980 marked the
assassination of the president of the Brasileia union, Wilson Pinheiro.
This resulted in a shift in the axis of the movement from Brasileia to
Xapuri.

The next few years were marked by a series of empates and assassinations
of union leaders. Then in 1985 the UDR, Democratic Ruralist Union, was
formed. This group was formed by the ranchers in response to Chico’s
efforts to organize against deforestation. The UDR hired large numbers
of armed forces to combat the union movement and initiated a number of
targeted assassinations of union leaders. 1985 also marked the founding
of the National Council of Rubber Tappers (CNS) by Mendes and other key
union leaders. The group gained widespread international support since
it was seen as both a social justice and environmental protection
campaign. Later that year Chico organized the First National Rubber
Tappers Congress. From this meeting emerged the proposal for extractive
reserves, legally protected forest areas held in trust for people who
lived and worked in a sustainable manner. This proposal offered an
economically viable alternative to the clearing of forests for grazing
land and would be the primary demand for the remainder of the campaign.

In 1986 the Xapuri Rural Workers’ Union allied with the indigenous
people of Brazil, who had also been historically discriminated against
and overlooked. This was particularly significant because the Indians
and rubber tappers had traditionally been at odds with one another over
forest resources. Thus, the alliance between these two groups signaled
for government officials the seriousness of the campaigns demands. In
June of 1986 Mendes organized over 200 tappers for a march on the
federal forestry office of Xapuri. Upon arrival the group staged a
sit-in, but were quickly evicted by the police. For the remainder of
1986 and 1987 the focus of the movement was recruitment of rubber
tappers for empates and rallying international support for the cause.
International recognition of Mendes with the Ted Turner’s Better World
Society Prize and United Nation’s Global 500 Environmental Prize, both
awarded to him in 1987, spread awareness of the campaign.

## Results

The campaign won the creation of a 61,000 acre tract of rainforest to be
off limits to logging, the first 'extractive reserve' in Brazil. In the
next 13 years, twenty-one additional reserves have been established,
protecting 1.5% of the Amazon's total area. However, the campaign
triggered a wave of assassinations of
[environmentalists](Environmentalism "wikilink"), [trade
unionists](Trade_Union "wikilink") and
[indigenists](Indigenism "wikilink").[^2]

## References

<references />

[Category:Events](Category:Events "wikilink") [Category:Libertarian
Socialist Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Environmentalism](Category:Environmentalism "wikilink")
[Category:Brazil](Category:Brazil "wikilink") [Category:South
America](Category:South_America "wikilink") [Category:20th
Century](Category:20th_Century "wikilink")
[Category:1970s](Category:1970s "wikilink")
[Category:1988](Category:1988 "wikilink")
[Category:1977](Category:1977 "wikilink")
[Category:1980s](Category:1980s "wikilink") [Category:Social
Movements](Category:Social_Movements "wikilink") [Category:Trade
Unionism](Category:Trade_Unionism "wikilink")
[Category:Cooperatives](Category:Cooperatives "wikilink")
[Category:Indigenism](Category:Indigenism "wikilink")

[^1]: <https://nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu/content/brazilian-rubber-tappers-campaign-protest-deforestation-brazilian-rainforest-region-1977-198>

[^2]: