---
title: Yakka Munga Blockade (2019)
permalink: /Yakka_Munga_Blockade_(2019)/
---

The **Yakka Munga Blockade** was a [picket](Picketing "wikilink") by
[Aboriginal Australians](Aboriginal_Australians "wikilink") in
[2019](Timeline_of_Libertarian_Socialism_in_Oceania "wikilink") to stop
the destruction of cultural sites from land-clearing on a
[Chinese-owned](China "wikilink") cattle station in the Kimberley,
[Western Australia](Australia "wikilink").

## Background

Aboriginal Australians had been pretty brutally treated by the colonial
government of the [British Empire](British_Empire "wikilink"), stealing
and enclosing aboriginal land and wiping out 98% of the population.
After Australia's independence in 1901, there were apartheid-esque
conditions for aboriginals (many also being pushed into slavery and/or
massacred by police) but even after the aboriginal rights movement, they
still face a lot of discrimination, being vilified or fetished in white
Australian culture, harassed by police and abused by corporations for
cheap labour.

The Yakka Munga site contained several sacred aboriginal artifacts and
had been sold off to Chinese investors as a cattle site (harming the
region ecologically), land clearing (of 24km by 50 meters) had been
destroying some of the few sacred sites left and the company acted
without the consent of the aboriginal land council.[^1]

## Events

Aboriginal protesters physically blocked the site in a picket, stopping
trucks carrying workers from entering.[^2]

## Results

The Western Australian Department of Water and Environmental Regulation
issued a stop work order to the company, the campaign was thus
successful.[^3]

## References

<references />

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Indigenism](Category:Indigenism "wikilink")
[Category:Blockades](Category:Blockades "wikilink")
[Category:Australia](Category:Australia "wikilink")
[Category:Oceania](Category:Oceania "wikilink")
[Category:2019](Category:2019 "wikilink")
[Category:2010s](Category:2010s "wikilink") [Category:21st
Century](Category:21st_Century "wikilink") [Category:Aboriginal
Australia](Category:Aboriginal_Australia "wikilink")

[^1]: [Yakka Munga station blockaded by protesters in fight to protect
    Kimberley
    land](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2019-06-19/yakka-munga-station-blockaded-by-protesters/11221424) -
    ABC Australia

[^2]:

[^3]: [WA Government issues Chinese company a stop-work order over
    Kimberley land
    clearing](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2019-06-21/wa-government-issues-chinese-company-a-stop-work-order-over-kim/11231758) -
    ABC Australia