---
title: Zionism
permalink: /Zionism/
---

**Zionism** or **Jewish Nationalism** is a political ideology which says
that [Jewish people](Judaism "wikilink") have a right to a nation in
part of or all of the holy land of [Israel](Israel "wikilink"), which
Jews are indigenous to. Supporters argue that this is a necessity to
provide a safe areas for Jewish people to live and practice their
religion in peace and safety (note that Zionism became popular after the
[Holocaust](Holocaust "wikilink")), critics argue that it's a violent
ideology used to justify a system of apartheid and Palestinian
oppression.

## Types of Zionism

### Arab Zionism

Zionism as supported by Arab nations. An example would be the Hashemites
during World War 1. They were promised to rule the Middle East by the
British, and they and the Zionists came to a deal where modern-day
Israel, the West Bank, Northern Syria, the Gaza Strip and Jordan would
become a Jewish state (roughly similar to the old one in scope), itself
inside a new Arab state to replace the Ottomans. The Hashemites
abandoned the idea and, with the support of the British, broke with the
Balfour Declaration and San Remo Conference which established modern
Jordan (then called Transjordan) as inside this, and founded the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.

### Christian Zionism

### Cultural Zionism

### Federal Zionism

### General Zionism

### Green Zionism

**Green Zionism** is a synthesis of
[environmentalist](Environmentalism "wikilink") and Zionist politics,
arguing that Israel must be a clean and sustainable civilization. It has
been influential in several [Kibbutzim](Kibbutzim "wikilink"), which
have made efforts to reduce their impact on the environment.

### Kahanism

### Labor Zionism

**Labor Zionism** or **Socialist Zionism** combines Zionist and
socialist politics. Some Labor Zionists argue that the creation of a
socialist society would correct the "inverted pyramid" of Jewish
society. Jews were forced out of normal occupations by Gentile hostility
and competition, using this dynamic to explain the relative predominance
of Jewish professionals, rather than workers. Jewish society, they
argued, would not be healthy until the inverted pyramid was righted, and
a substantial number of Jews became workers and peasants again. This,
they held, could only be accomplished by Jews in their own country.
Labor Zionism has been hugely influential in the creation of the
[Kibbutzim](Kibbutzim "wikilink") and [Moshavim](Moshav "wikilink").

<big>**Anarcho-Zionism**</big>

A type of Zionism which supports the right of Jewish people to create
communes inside Israel, and establish them as an escape from
anti-semitism, and holds allowing this to happen is natural and should
be supported in a Anarchist Society. Anarcho-Zionism does not hold the
state as essential to Zionism, but rather the community.

### Muslim Zionism

### Neo-Zionism

An idea, mainly purported by Anti-Zionists, of a new type of Zionism,
based on mass expansion. No group has ever called itself Neo-Zionist,
and the term was coined alongside Post-Zionism.

### Post-Zionism

**Post-Zionism** is a position that argues Israel has fulfilled its
functions, but it raises further questions about Israel's future, such
as:

- Is the state of Israel indeed a safe shelter for the Jewish nation?
- How does Israel keep its Jewish and Democratic character?
- Should all the blame for the continuation of the conflict fall on the
  Arab side?

Post-Zionists argue that Israel must serve a function as a democratic
and egalitarian state in a region of brutal authoritarianism and
inequality.

### Reform Zionism

### Religious Zionism

### Revisionist Zionism

A Zionist which supports Conservative (usually moderate
right-Libertarian) positions, as opposed to Labour Zionism, which was
the status quo at its inception. Revisionist Zionism currently accepts
and supports things like Universal Healthcare and Gay Rights in Israel,
but has advocated for economic deregulation and a more capitalist
structure overall.

## Criticism

Critics of Zionism are generally called **Anti-Zionists**, and
criticisms can divided into 'good' and 'bad' criticisms. Good criticisms
recognise that Jews and Zionists are different groups of people, and are
thus not critical of Jewish people or Jewish religion. Bad criticism
does not recognise that Jews and Zionists are different groups of
people, and is often used as a cover for antisemitism. Bad criticism
also fundamentally rejects Jews as a people, their history in Israel,
and their ethnic or cultural connection to Israel. Criticism such as
denying Zionism uniquely supporting other forms of statism like it falls
into this category.

Here at [libsoc-wiki](Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink"), we stand
with all Jews of the world against antisemitism from the left and right.
Along with all other people against any form of bigotry.

### Good Criticism

### Bad Criticism

Ilhan Omar declaring Zionism is fundamentally evil. This would be like
saying Native Americans moving into their home is bad.

Mansour Abbas declaring Jews are an ethnic group with no connection to
Israel.

Some people (including much of the modern Jewish community) argue that
that, as Zionism is the idea Jews should establish communities inside
Israel where most Jews are from (as it is an ethnoreligion and Arabs are
from Arabia), and that ideology is separate from the modern Israeli
state, declaring Zionism evil is an attack on the Jewish communities
right to exist as an entity at all, separate from criticizing Israel.

[Category:Libertarian Socialist
Wiki](Category:Libertarian_Socialist_Wiki "wikilink")
[Category:Ideologies](Category:Ideologies "wikilink")
[Category:Zionism](Category:Zionism "wikilink")